Silver lining to a climate crisis in multiple prospects for alleviating crop waterlogging under future climates Ke Liu 1,2,29 , Matthew Tom Harrison 1,29 , Haoliang Yan 3,29 , De Li Liu 4,5 , Holger Meinke 1 , Gerrit Hoogenboom 6 , Bin Wang 4 , Bin Peng 7,8,9 , Kaiyu Guan 7,8,9 , Jonas Jaegermeyr10,11,12 , Enli Wang 13 , Feng Zhang 14 , Xiaogang Yin 15 , Sotirios Archontoulis 16 , Lixiao Nie17 , Ana Badea 18 , Jianguo Man19 , Daniel Wallach20 , Jin Zhao21 , Ana Borrego Benjumea 18 , ShahFahad 22 ,XiaohaiTian 2 ,WeiluWang 23 ,FuluTao 24,25 ,ZhaoZhang26 , Reimund Rötter 27 , Youlu Yuan3 , Min Zhu18 , Panhong Dai 28 , Jiangwen Nie 15 , Yadong Yang 15 , Yunbo Zhang 2 & Meixue Zhou1 Extreme weather events threaten food security, yet global assessments of impacts caused by crop waterlogging are rare. Here we ﬁrst develop a para digmthatdistilscommonstresspatterns acrossenvironments,genotypesand climate horizons. Second, we embed improved process-based understanding into a farming systems model to discern changes in global crop waterlogging under future climates. Third, we develop avenues for adapting cropping sys tems to waterlogging contextualised by environment. We ﬁnd that yield penalties caused by waterlogging increase from 3–11% historically to 10–20% by 2080, with penalties reﬂecting a trade-off between the duration of water logging and the timing of waterlogging relative to crop stage. We document greater potential for waterlogging-tolerant genotypes in environments with longer temperate growing seasons (e.g., UK, France, Russia, China), compared with environments with higher annualised ratios of evapotranspiration to precipitation (e.g., Australia). Under future climates, altering sowing time and adoption of waterlogging-tolerant genotypes reduces yield penalties by 18%, while earlier sowing of winter genotypes alleviates waterlogging by 8%. We highlight the serendipitous outcome wherein waterlogging stress patterns under present conditions are likely to be similar to those in the future, sug gesting that adaptations for future climates could be designed using stress patterns realised today. Increasingly frequent and compound extreme weather events driven by the intensiﬁcation of the global water cycle threaten the sustain abilityandconsistencyofagri-foodproduction1–3 .Coupledwithglobal population growth and a burgeoning demand for food, exposure to weather extremes demand the development of new knowledge, technologies and practices that enable scalable, sustainable intensiﬁcation4,5 . Robust projections of climate impacts on crop growth under pinned by process-based models6,7 are fundamental in the quest to designeffectiveandcrediblesystems-basedadaptationsthatminimise Received: 15 July 2022 Accepted: 16 January 2023 Check for updates A full list of afﬁliations appears at the end of the paper. e-mail: matthew.harrison@utas.edu.au Nature Communications|(2023)14:765 1 1234567890():,; 1234567890():,;downside risk associated with future climate8–10 . Application of such models enables consideration of nonlinear, integrated crop responses to environmental, genetic and management conditions7,11 , supporting the development of socially-acceptable and proﬁtable climate change adaptation and/or greenhouse gas emissions mitigation strategies12–14 . However,whiletheoverwhelmingmajorityofpreviousclimatechange assessments have used a lens focused on either drought, heat or gra dual climate change1,3,15–17 , our knowledge of the impacts of soil waterlogging on crop growth is very much in its infancy18–21 . Globally, around 27% of cultivatedlands areimpacted by ﬂooding eachyear,with annual costs of ﬂood damage over the last half-century reaching a headline value of US$19 billion22–25 . Intensiﬁcation of the globalwater cyclecalledforth by the climate crisis would appear to be driving a higher prevalence of waterlogging, placing pressure on the use-efﬁciency of economic, natural and social capital20 . While geno type (G)×environment (E)×management (M) studies pertaining to climate change adaptation abound26–31 , such work is often not con ducted in a way that facilitates scaling to other regions or transfer ability from other studies. Here, we develop a new approach for assimilatingmanifoldresultsfromcropmodelsintocommon,discrete setsofgroups.Thesegroups—characterisedbydailystresstrajectories plotted over the crop lifecycle as a function of phenology—invoke plant stress, because perceived stress represents an integrated mea sure of biomass, canopy leaf area, cumulative water supply, vapour pressure deﬁcit and several other factors interacting across an atmosphere-plant-soilcontinuum.Assuch,plantstresshaslongbeena ubiquitous target for quantiﬁcation and manipulation in molecular, breeding and agronomic studies32–35 . While G×E×M factorial studies are useful, attempts to interpret results using the association between management interventions and maturity biomass or yield36 can make it difﬁcult to derive functional, rationally bounded37 insights across all of the interventions deployed. In contrast, we suggest that crop stress patterns characterised as a function of phenology are limited in type; when grouped across an entire factorial analysis, such relationships can be aggregated into common groups and recurrence intervals, even though individual stresstrajectories mayappearunique. To standardise contrasts across treatments, we grouped waterlogging stress as a function of phenol ogy. We focus on waterlogging stress and barley as case studies, but the principles could be generically applied to any crop or biological variable. A fundamental contribution of our approach is the ability to functionally categorise big datasets. Armed with knowledge of stress prevalence and pattern using this method, scientiﬁc practitioners can (1) more intuitively identify the most appropriate adaptation within stress patterns that are more probable for their environment and (2) transfer adaptations across regions within any given stress type35,38 . Buildingonfoundationalinsightsfromourpreviouswaterlogging experiments conducted using a range of genotypes and treatments in controlled environments39 , we enumerate the effects of waterlogging on photosynthesis and phenology and then use these insights to improve the capacity of the internationally renowned model APSIM to simulate the impacts of waterlogging on crop growth40 . Although past work has shown that our new waterlogging algorithms reproduce the effects of waterlogging stress on contemporary barley genotypes40 with reasonable precision, the validity of our new algorithms across a broadarray ofglobalcropping environmentsremains unknown. To ﬁll these knowledge gaps, we ﬁrst calibrated and evaluated the waterlogging-enabled version of APSIM using measured ﬁeld data from ﬁve countries. We then applied the waterlogging-enabled model and novel clustering paradigm in each of the major barley production zones across the world with the speciﬁc objectives of (1) quantifying the effects of climate change on waterlogging, (2) characterising common waterlogging stress patterns and frequencies across envir onments, (3) determining the extent with which common stress pat ternschangeunderfutureclimate,and(4),quantifyingtheextentwith which waterlogging tolerance genotypes, genotypic phenology and sowing time mitigate effects of waterlogging under future climates. Results and discussion Conceptualising impacts of waterlogging on phenology and photosynthesis Past work has shown that crop sensitivity to waterlogging stress is critically dependent on the developmental stage in which water logging occurs31 . As such, we modelled waterlogging stress as a func tion of phenology, which is in itself a signiﬁcant advance on the majority of previous studies, the latter assuming that waterlogging stress is primarily a function of water-ﬁlled pore space and has negli gible effect on crop ontogeny (e.g., ref. 40 ). We developed new func tions to account for experimentally observed effects of waterlogging on photosynthesis and phenology (oxdef photo and oxdef pheno, respectively; Fig. 1a)40 . Each dimensionless function assumes multi pliers ranging from unity to nil in the form of y=f(x), where y is the stressfactorandxissoilmoisture.Whenxis atorbelowﬁeldcapacity, y=1; y linearly decreases with increasing x until the point at which the soil is saturated (y=0). These functions were incorporated into the APSIM software platform to enable improved simulation of crop responses to waterlogging as part of an integrated system. We cali brated the waterlogging-enabled framework using published data from ﬁeld observations across ﬁve countries (Australia, Argentina, China,Canada and Ireland; SupplementaryTable 1). Including the new waterlogging functions signiﬁcantly improved the performance of APSIM in simulating the biophysical impacts of waterlogging relative to the default version of the model, with the root mean square error (RMSE) for waterlogged yield loss predictions decreasing from 0.3 to 0.1 (Fig. 1b). The modiﬁed model adequately captured the variation in grain yield of multiple genotypes in response to a range of water logging treatments across environments (Fig. 1b), with simulations accounting for 70% of the variation in observed yield. Impacts of a changing climate on global soil waterlogging and barley yield UsingdownscaledprojectionsfromAssessmentReport6(AR636 )from 27 global circulation models (GCMs; Supplementary Table 2), we quantiﬁed how current waterlogging frequencies may change under future climates. Following recent reports41 , we simulated crop growth and development using the most plausible greenhouse gas emissions scenario (ie. SSP585) for climate horizons of 2030–2059 and 2070–2099 (hereafter respectively referred to as 2040 and 2080). To account for variable growing season durations under future climates, we examine crops sown relatively earlyandlate at eachsite in factorial combination with shorter-growing season genotypes (‘spring’) and longer growing season genotypes (‘winter’; Supplementary Table 3). Our simulations suggest that even though the risk of severe waterlogging will increase under future climate (2-10% increase across GCMs, sites and sowing dates; Supplementary Fig. 1), yields will also slightlyincreaseduetofertilisationfromatmosphericCO2 enrichment and mitigation of cold stress at high latitudes (Fig. 2a–d and Supple mentary Fig. 1). Our work suggests that past estimates of yield that do notaccountforsoilwaterloggingmaybeoverestimated:hereweshow thatsimulatedfutureyieldsdecreasedby8–18%in2040and17–26%in 2080 when physiological effects were embedded in the modelling framework(Fig.2a,d).Thismodulatingeffectofwaterloggingon yield wasespecially pronouncedinwinter genotypes regions (Fig. 2c),likely because such crops have longer growing seasons and greater annual rainfall.Globally,theaverageyieldpenaltycausedbywaterloggingwas 11% for the historical baseline, 14% in 2040 and 20% in 2080 for winter barley (median yield penalty 130–591kgha−1 ; Fig. 4d), while for spring barley yield penalties were 3% for the historical baseline, 6% in 2040 and 10% in 2080 (median yield penalty 50–91kgha−1 ; Fig. 4a) across GCMs, sites and sowing dates.

Nature Communications|(2023)14:765 2Despite increased impacts of waterlogging, spring barley yields increased by 5% in 2040 and 13% in 2080 for early sowing (ES) and by 7% in 2040 and 18% in 2080 for late sowing (Supplementary Fig. 1). Future climates had variable effects on spring barley yield, ranging from positive (e.g., Australia, Germany, Spain, France, United King dom, Ukraine and Russia) to antagonistic (Argentina, Canada, Central Ethiopia,UkraineandUnitedstates;SupplementaryTable4).Averaged across sites and climate horizons, yields increased by 22% and 9% for early and late sown winter barley (Supplementary Fig. 1). For both future climate horizons, winter barley yields increased for most regions under early sowing, with greater gains expected in Europe (18%; Supplementary Table 4). These changes suggest that forward shifts in sowing time of long-season genotypes may beneﬁt yields, congruent with other work42 . Distilling common stress patterns across diverse environments, genotypes and management approaches Improved understanding of common waterlogging-stress seasonal patterns allows insight into the timing of waterlogging stress relative to crop phenology, which then governs cumulative effects on growth, tillering, ﬂoral development and yield35,40,43 . When applied in the pre sent study, these results help explain differences between yield penalties caused by waterlogging stress between winter and spring barley (Fig. 3a–f). Using waterlogging stress outputs from the model computedasa functionof historical climate, soilphysics, atmospheric demand, plant biology and agronomy, we calculate stress indices for each day of crop growth. We applied unsupervised k-means clustering to many thousand individual trajectories of discretised waterlogging stress as a function of the phenological stage into four common clusters (Figs. 3 and 4); within each stage, the algorithm minimises within-cluster variances. The four clusters accounted for 71% of the variance for spring barley and 80% for winter barley (increasing to ﬁve clusters accounted for 74% and 85% of total variance for spring and winter barley and was deemed superﬂuous accuracy; Supplementary Fig. 2). While we showcase barley and waterlogging stress as exemplars, the principles shown here could be applied to any crop, region, stress type or bio physical model output. Winter genotypes experienced substantially different patterns of seasonal waterlogging stress relative to spring genotypes atthe global scale (cf. Fig. 3a–f); waterlogging primarily occurred in the juvenile phase of winter barley (WW3) cf. during reproductive development of spring types (SW2-3). While cereals are more likely to experience yield losseswhenexposedtowaterloggingduringtheirreproductivephases (yield formation of cereals being tightly coupled with kernel number and mass) we showed that winter genotypes exposed to waterlogging during their juvenile phases had lower yields than spring genotypes exposed to waterlogging during their reproductive phases, because the magnitude of waterlogging experienced by winter types was greater. Put another way, yield penalties caused by waterlogging Fig. 1 | Framework invoked for modelling waterlogging (WL) stress, including conceptualdesign ofcropphysiologicalresponses to waterlogging and model evaluation before (default) and after (improved) modiﬁcation. a Schematic of genotypictraitsinﬂuencedbywaterloggingandlinkagewithexistingsoilandwater sub-models in APSIM. b Comparison of observed (Obs) and simulated (Sim) waterlogged yield loss compared with controls across environments simulated by improvedanddefaultversionsofAPSIM.Datain(b)representcontemporarybarley genotypeswithvaryingwaterloggingtolerance(n=36).Parameterdescriptionsare provided in Supplementary Table 4.

Nature Communications|(2023)14:765 3reﬂectedan importanttrade-off between the duration ofwaterlogging experienced within a given phase and the timing of waterlogging relative to the crop stage; across simulations, yield penalties asso ciatedwith winter barley were moresevere thanthoseof spring barley (Fig. 4a, d). While recurrence frequencies for each of the four main water logging stress patterns for spring genotypes remained similar under future climate, frequencies of early severe (WW3) and mild (WW1) waterloggingduringthejuvenilephasesofwintergenotypesincreased under future climate at the expense of seasons with minimal water logging. Stress pattern WW1 increased from 7% to 17% (under early sowing; Fig. 4e) while WW3 from 3% to 8% (under late sowing; Fig. 4f) compared with the baseline and 2080 periods (Fig. 3). Increased fre quencies of severe waterlogging underpin the greater reductions in yieldsobservedforwintergenotypescomparedwithspringgenotypes under future climate (Figs. 2a, c and 4d), primarily due to increased waterlogging in France, the UK, Russia and China (Supplemen tary Fig. 3). Pathways for adapting agricultural systems to waterlogging Adaptation of agricultural systems to climate change has and will require cross-disciplinary action: new knowledge, practices and tech nologies that integrate agronomic, environmental, molecular, social and institutional dimensions will be required5,44,45 . By 2080, early sowing of spring barley reduced the occurrence of low waterlogging (SW0; Fig. 4b), while later sowing of spring barley increased the like lihood of low waterlogging occurrence but did not affect the fre quency of the most severe type of waterlogging SW3 (Fig. 4c). In contrast, earlier sowing of winter barley diminished frequencies of both severe and low waterlogging stress (WW1 and WW3; Fig. 4e), while later sowing of winter types increased risk of early-onset severe and moderate waterlogging (WW1-WW3; Fig. 4f). Overall, we suggest that sowing time of spring barley in 2080 had relatively little effect on themagnitude ofthe typeofwaterlogging stress,whilelater sowing of winter barley was likely to increase the likelihood of exposure to waterlogging stress. Altering sowing time coupled with the adoption of superior genetics resulted in further gains in yield. Based on experimental observations,wedevelopedinsilicogenotypestoleranttosoilhypoxia and anoxia typically experienced when soils become waterlogged46 . After verifying the ability of the improved model to capture behaviour of tolerant genotypes during and after waterlogging (Fig. 1b), we examinedthelong-termperformanceandyieldbeneﬁtexpectedwhen waterlogging tolerant spring and winter genotypes were coupled with other prospective adaptations (altered sowing time and/or phenolo gical duration). New genotypes with waterlogging tolerance demon strablyincreasedbarley yieldunder wetter years(Fig.5)andin general (SupplementaryFig.4)underfutureclimates.Acrosssites,theaverage 1000 3000 6000 0 20 40 60 80 20 40

Yield penalty Site Spring barley Winter barley 1000 3000 6000 60 30 0 -30 90 60 30 0 Yield (kg ha-1) Yield (kg ha-1) 180 180 Spring barley yield change (%) Winter barley yield change (%) E L 2040 2080 2040 2080 Yield penalty Site E L E L E L Fig. 2 | Impacts of waterlogging on yield under future climates (2040, 2080) relativetothehistoricalbaseline(1985–2016)forearlyandlatesowing(ES,LS). a, c Simulated yield differences under future climates with and without water logging (WL) for genotypes with early (spring sowing barley) or late maturity (autumn/winter sowing barley). b, d Simulated yields (pie charts; dark segments denote yield penalty) under late sowing for spring barley and early sowing for winter barley in 2040 (results for early or late sowing in 2040 and 2080 can be found in supplementary Fig. 12). Yields were simulated with APSIM using down scaledprojectionsfrom27GCMs(n=27).Boxplotsindicatesimulatedyieldchange acrosssitesandGCMs;boxboundariesindicate25thand75thpercentiles,whiskers below and above each box denote the 10th and 90th percentiles, respectively. Greenregionsinthemapsdeﬁnepredominantbarleycropping areas.Themapwas modiﬁed using R package ggplot2’maps (version 3.4.0)’ with the Natural Earth dataset in a publica domain (https://www.naturalearthdata.com).

Nature Communications|(2023)14:765 4yield beneﬁt of waterlogging tolerant lines was 14% and 18% (s.d., 23% and 34%) for early- and later sowing in the 2040s compared with the baseline genotypes. Similar yield beneﬁts were observed in 2080 (Supplementary Fig. 5). Mean yield beneﬁts were greater for winter genotypes (480–620kgha−1 ) than spring genotypes (194–213kgha−1 ; Fig. 5). Importantly, yield beneﬁts associated with waterlogging toler ance of new genotypes did not come at the expense of yield in drier years, and reduced downside risk associated with low yielding years (Supplementary Fig. 4). Our results suggest that there would be more scope for and potential impact of waterlogging tolerant genotypes in environments withlonger,coolerandmoretemperate growingseasons (e.g.,theUK, France, Russia and China; Fig. 5 and Supplementary Fig. 6), compared with shorter-growing season environments requiring fast-maturity genotypes. This result may reﬂect the fact that longer growing season environments have higher rainfall, more frequent soil saturation, and/ or greater propensity for extreme rainfall events. In countries with higher annualised ratios of evapotranspiration to precipitation and lower risk of waterlogging (e.g., Australia), genotypes with water logging tolerance conferred relativelylittle beneﬁt over the long-term. Future crop waterlogging stress patterns remain similar to those occurring historically We developed a new approach for clustering common stress patterns to facilitate functional insight into big data that would otherwise be outside the bounds of reasonable cognitive capacity. This character isation of the timing of waterlogging stress as a function of phenology across diversemanagement, environments and climate types revealed two fundamental insights when assessed at the global scale. First, winter genotypes experienceearlierseasonalpatterns ofwaterlogging stress relative to spring genotypes (cf. Fig. 3a–f). Even though cereal crops are more sensitive to waterlogging during their reproductive phases, winter genotypes experienced greater yield penalty under early waterlogging (than spring genotypes under later waterlogging), becausewaterloggeddurationsexperiencedbywintergenotypeswere generally longer (Figs. 3 and 4a, d). Second, even though future crop waterlogging events are likely to increase by 2–10% (Supplementary Fig. 7), we revealed the serendipitous outcome in which waterlogging stress patterns for each of winter and spring genotypes under present conditions are likely to be similar to those expected in future climate (Supplementary Fig. 8). Equipped with such knowledge, agronomists andcropbreederswouldlikelyachievemorewidespreadimpactifnew spring genotypes were adapted to late-season waterlogging, while proposeddevelopmentofnewwinterbarleygenotypeswouldlikelyto achieve wider impact if designed with early waterlogging in mind. It shouldbenotedthatwhilesituationswithminimalwaterloggingstress (SW0 and WW0) would predominate (Fig. 3c, f); this result does not guarantee that such environments will not experience waterlogging stress under future climate, rather, that low waterlogging stress is more likely to emanate over the long-term40,47 . Similar frequencies of waterlogging under historical and future conditions is a fortuitous outcome, because it suggests that practi tioners could effectively develop today’s adaptations for the tem poral waterlogging patterns of tomorrow. If future waterlogging stress patterns were dissimilar to those occurring historically, then the design of effective adaptations to future conditions would be more hindered due to the need to establish controlled-stress environments48 or create synthetic waterlogging stress patterns similar to those expected in future. However, similar historical and future waterlogging stress patterns suggest that beneﬁcial adapta tions within each waterlogging stress pattern—e.g., the early-onset severe pattern of winter barley— could be readily transferred between regions, production systems and time periods, provided that other factors remained unchanged (e.g., local-adaptation of genotypes for disease resistance). Clustering stress patterns into commongroupsallows usto move away fromlocallyspeciﬁc factors causing the waterlogging stress (e.g., poor drainage, rising groundwater, superﬂuous rainfall, sowing time, genotype, soil type Fig. 3 | Waterlogging (WL) stress patterns and frequencies and grain yields for

shown for spring (a–c) and winter barley (d–f) across sites, sowing times and genotypes. Four key waterlogging stress patterns across sites and genotypes are depicted: stress patterns for spring barley include SW0 (minimal waterlogging); SW1 (low moderate-late waterlogging); SW2 (late-onset moderate waterlogging); SW3 (late-onset severe waterlogging) and winter barley WW0 (minimal water logging);WW1 (low early-onsetwaterlogging relievedlater);WW2 (moderate early onset waterlogging); WW3 (severe early-onset waterlogging). Boxplots indicate grain yields for spring and winter barley across sites and GCMs; box boundaries indicatethe25th and75th percentilesacross27GCMs,whiskersbelowandabovethe boxindicatethe10thand90thpercentiles.Growthstagesincludetheearlyjuvenile phase (JV1, 10<=APSIM growth stage <21; late juvenile phase (JV2, 21<=APSIM growth stage <32); ﬂoral initiation to heading (FIN, 32<=APSIM growth stage <65); ﬂowering to grainﬁlling (FIN, 65<=APSIMgrowthstage <71;early grainﬁlling (GF1, 71<=APSIM growth stage <80) and late grain ﬁlling (GF2, 80<=APSIM growth stage <87).

Nature Communications|(2023)14:765 5etc.) to the stress pattern that would most likely be realised in a given environment as a function of crop phenology. Ontheimplicationsofregionalclimatechangeforwaterlogging and grain yield Our work has shown that mean grain yield penalty caused by water logging increased from 6 to 14% in 2040 to 10–20% by 2080 across GCMs, genotypes, management and sites. This result encompasses locally speciﬁc ﬁndings for Europe (e.g., France, Germany, UK and Spain)49 and China43 under superﬂuous precipitation scenarios. In these regions, yields were higher under future climate due to elevated atmospheric CO2 concentrations and moderate alleviation of cold stresswhenwaterwasnotlimiting50–52 ,analogoustoyieldgainsseenin US dairy systems3,16 . Our ﬁndings also align with previous work which suggests that winter crop yields in Europe will rise by 205053 due to greater biomass production, grain number and grain weight asso ciated with a fertilisation effect of atmospheric CO2 and moderate warming11 . In waterlogging-prone regions within Australia, we showed that yields are likely to increase under future climate due to a lower incidence of waterlogging (Fig. 2). Less rainfall in regions with high precipitation (>600mm/year) may reduce disease susceptibility (e.g., stripe rust), improve crop health and further raise yield under future climate, although it should be noted that biotic pressures were not accounted for in the modelling framework used here (e.g. Snow etal.54 ).Toavoidconfoundingimpactsofsuperﬂuouswaterwiththose of nitrogen stress, we ran simulations without N stress invoked, albeit effects of waterlogging on mineral N and the corollary of such interplay would be a fruitful endeavor for future research (Rawnsley et al.55 ). Climatictransitiontowardsdrierandhotterconditionsbytheend of 21st century is projected for many regions, often with an increased likelihood of extreme weather events40,41,50,52 . Even though future cli mate were conducive to a 2–10% higher risk of severe waterlogging across the entire solution space (Supplementary Fig. 8), high variation between regions and genotypic lifecycles (Supplementary Figs. 3 and 8) was offset by the beneﬁcial effects of climate change that collec tivelyimprovedyieldby8–17%underfutureclimate.Aspartofthis,we found higher frequencies of early-onset severe waterlogging stress in Argentina, Ethiopia, China, the UK, France and Germany, in line with reports of increased ﬂash ﬂooding in some regions towards the end of the 21st century, particularly Asia and Africa56 . We suggest that parti cular attention should be placed on the development of waterlogging Yield lose (kg ha −1 ) Yield lose (kg ha −1 ) Years Baseline 20 0 20 0 pring inter 0 500 1000 1500 2000 0 500 1000 1500 2000 Yield lose (kg ha −1 ) Yield lose (kg ha −1 ) Fig. 4 | Grain yield penalty and waterlogging stress patterns for the baseline

shown for spring (a) and winter (d) barley across sites and genotypes for relatively early or late sowing (ES, LS) at each site. Boxplots indicate yield penalty for spring and winter barleyacross sitesand GCMs (n=27); box boundariesindicate25th and 75th percentiles, whiskers below and above the box indicate the 10th and 90th percentiles, respectively. Waterlogging stress patterns for spring barley include SW0 (minimal waterlogging); SW1 (low moderate-late waterlogging); SW2 (late onset moderate waterlogging); SW3 (late-onset severe waterlogging) and winter barley, WW0 (minimal waterlogging); WW1 (low early-onset waterlogging relieved later); WW2 (moderate early-onset waterlogging); WW3 (severe early-onset water logging). Data in (b), (c), (e) and (f) are presented as mean±standard errors of the mean of GCMs (n=27). Data were analysed using one-way analysis of variance followed by least signiﬁcant difference(LSD) post-hoc tests.Different lettersin(b), (c), (e) and (f) above the bars indicate signiﬁcant differences in the frequency of stresspatterns betweenclimate periods(P<0.05).Exact Pvaluesinclude:4.96e-08 (SW0 for ES in spring barley), 0.46 (SW1 for ES in spring barley), 1.47e-04 (SW2 for ESin spring barley), 2.61e-08 (SW3 for ES in spring barley), 7.44e-07 (SW0 for LSin spring barley),2.88e-05(SW1forLSinspring barley),5.39e-04(SW2forLSinspring barley), 0.49 (SW3 for LS in spring barley), 1.42e−11 (WW0 for ES in winter barley), 2.30e-08(WW1forESinwinterbarley),5.66e-06(WW2forESinwinterbarley),0.84 (WW3 for ES in winter barley), 3.97e-07 (WW0 for LS in winter barley), 0.97 (WW1 forLSinwinter barley),4.93e-04(WW2 for LS in winter barley) and 6.01e-09(WW3 for LS in winter barley).

Nature Communications|(2023)14:765 6mitigation approaches for smallholders and the rural poor in lower latitude countries where increased ﬂood frequency is projected and prevailing rainfall is already high; women, youth and marginalised groupsneedtobeempoweredforproposedadaptationapproachesto be successful. To engender adoption, appropriate research, develop ment, policy and extension packages will be required to ensure that proposed adaptations are cost-effective, demand-driven, socially responsible and equitable57,58 . A requirement for contextualised adaptation to future climate change The effectiveness of genotypic adaptation (i.e., introduction of crops with waterlogging tolerance genes) was higher in Ethiopia, China, Germany, France and UK. Across countries analysed, we showed that the adoption of waterlogging tolerant genotypes could mitigate up to 18% yield penalty caused by waterlogging under future climate, sug gestingfurtherresearchanddevelopmentofsuchgenotypeswouldbe a worthwhile investment. In other regions, converting from longer season winter genotypes to short-season spring genotypes could help avoid waterlogging, but with regional speciﬁcity viz. long-season waterlogging tolerant genotypes were shown to be more effective in Ethiopia, while short-season waterlogging tolerant genotypes were more effective in Europe and China. Taken together, our results sug gest that contextualised adaptation will be key: there is no panacea, andcertainlynosingulargenericsolutionforallenvironments.Fruitful future research may include ‘stacking’ or combining of several bene ﬁcial adaptations to determine whether the beneﬁt from individual adaptations is synergistic or antagonistic5,51 . As far as we are aware, the present study is the ﬁrst experimental quantiﬁcation of waterlogging expected under future climate in each of the major barley cropping zones of the world. To quantify water logging stress patterns, we develop and exemplify a simple, transfer able approach for clustering crop stress patterns across regions, climate, management and genotypes. We show that even though the frequencies of global waterlogging will become higher, these changes will be outweighed overall by reduced waterlogging in other regions togetherwithelevatedCO2 andwarmergrowingseasontemperatures. Our clustering approach comprises a pathway in which diverse bio climatic applications may be able to categorise big data outputs into functional and biologically-meaningful patterns. While we apply this method to waterlogging and barley, although the framework could be readily applied to any crop,production system,or temporal biological variable. With regards to adaptation, we show that waterlogging tol erance genetics will have beneﬁt in Ethiopia, France and China, but particularly in regions were long-season ‘winter’ genotypes are com monplace. Shifting from relatively late to early sowing or from late to early maturity genotypes may alleviate waterlogging-induced yield penalties in some environments (Australia, Canada, Spain, Turkey and USA). Inthisstudy,weusedAPSIMbasedonevidencethatsuggeststhat this farming systems framework is one of the most reliable models for simulating waterlogging dynamics57,59 . Increasingly, however, multi model ensemble studies for predicting agroecological variables are becomingcommonplace,associatedwiththeriseofhigh-performance computing, big data and cloud analytics30,31,60 . Some ensemble studies suggest that taking either the ensemble mean or median of simulated values provide more accurate estimates than any individual model when variables related to growth are considered61,62 . Indeed, the authors of the present study are working as part of an international research team in an Agricultural Modelling Intercomparison Project (AgMIP)59 to test the applicability of our new approaches in a global study of crop waterlogging. This will allow us to scale our develop ments from barley to other genotypes, management options and environments using a range of modelsand, together with co-design as partof a community of AgMIP practitioners, improve the rigour of the approaches developed here. While we onlyused one crop model, we invokedprojections from an ensemble of outputs from 27 global climate models (GCMs). This aspect could be construed as both a strength and a weakness; the former because the ensemble mean of climatic projections should be more reliable than a projection from any one GCM (as discussed above),thelatterbecausethevariabilityinmodelledoutputsincreases associated with greater variability in climatic realisations. Larger variability in outputs increases the uncertainty associated with the projection and can make results from such studies more difﬁcult to comprehend in a rationally bounded way50,63 . In fact, such diversity in potential simulated results across sites, seasons, genotypes and man agement was a key reason we developed the new approach to cluster waterlogging stress patterns. Of all GCM outputs, rainfall is perhaps the most uncertain. A key reason for using the data from 27 GCMs was to better quantify the spatiotemporal distribution of and variability in precipitation during thegrowingseason.WedownscaledtheGCMdatasetsusingtheNASA/ POWER gridded historical weather database64 . However, previous work has shown that interpolated gridded data tends to be conducive to producing rainfall events that are smaller in quantum but more frequent, which can lead to lower surface runoff and higher soil evaporation64 . In a crop model, this could reduce plant water and nitrogen uptake, resulting in the propagation of errors that impact on variablessuchasbiomassandyield.Usingagriculturalsystemsmodels with observed data before spatially interpolating point-based results may thus represent a more preferable approach for reducing SEM 0−5 5−10 10−15 Fig. 5 | Mean and standard error of the mean (SEM) for grain yield beneﬁt associated with waterlogging tolerant genotypes relative to waterlogging susceptible genotypes for 2040 (2030–2059). Values were computed across yearsand27GCMsinwhichbarleygrowingseasonrainfallwashigherthanthe90th percentile; numerical values shown in each panel represent mean grain yield ben eﬁt across sites, years and GCMs. The map was modiﬁed using R package ggplot2’maps (version 3.4.0)’ with the Natural Earth dataset in a public domain (https://www.naturalearthdata.com).

Nature Communications|(2023)14:765 7uncertainty in model outputs. While the present study avoids the aforementioned issue associated with nitrogen uptake because nitro gen stress was not invoked, in practice, mineral nitrogen deﬁciencies associated with waterlogging may be present because waterlogging impacts on the ability of plant roots to uptake nutrients65,66 . Although we revealed multiple prospects for alleviating crop waterlogging under future climates, the variability in simulated yield and phenology responses under future climates highlights the importance of genotypic sensitivity to waterlogging stress. Across scenarios,meanyieldpenaltyfromwaterloggingincreasedfrom3–11% (baseline) to 6–14% (2040) and 10–20% (2080). Potential yield losses largely depend on genotypic sensitivity to waterlogging stress, in general with greater yield gains for tolerant genotypes of early sown (winter maturity) waterlogging tolerant genotypes, and the lowest gains for later sowing of (spring maturity) waterlogging tolerant gen otypes (Fig. 5). We obtained genotypic parameters for waterlogging tolerance and phenology from previous empirical studies40,67 but additional parameters from local genotypes would help improve the rigour of projected changes under future climates. However, we emphasise that the relative difference between scenarios is more important than the absolute values in this study. Methods Experimental data used for parameterisation and evaluation Measured data from ﬁve two-year experiments (Exp1, Exp2, Exp3, Exp4, Exp5) conducted in ﬁve countries (Australia, Argentina, Canada, China and Ireland) were used for model development and evaluation. Exp1 was conducted under controlled conditions (Mt Pleasant Laboratories,Launceston, Tasmania,Australia)with four waterlogging treatments using six contemporary Australian barley genotypes dif fering in their waterlogging tolerance from 2019 to 2020 (see refs. 39,40 ). In Exp2, barley yields were measured under ﬁve water logging treatments in the greenhouse and ﬁeld conditions at the School of Agronomy, University of Buenos Aires, Argentina in 2010 (see ref.68 ). In Exp3,barleygenotypeswere evaluatedforwaterlogging tolerance in controlled ﬁeld conditions at Brandon Research and Development Centre, Brandon, Manitoba, Canada from 2016 to 2017. Waterloggingtreatmentswereinitiatedattilleringbyaddingthewater toheightsof0.5–1cmabovethesoilsurface(seeref.69 ).InExp4,barley yields were measured in ﬁeld conditions carried out at Oak Park, Carlow, Ireland from 2017 to 2018. Waterlogging treatments were initiated at the tillering stage using a boom irrigator (see ref. 70 ). In Exp5, ﬁeld experiments were conducted in 2003–2004 and 2005–2006 at Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Waterlogging treatments were imposed at tillering (see refs. 71,72 ). All experiments were carefully managed to provide adequate nutrition and control of biotic pressures. Original datasets used for model evaluation (e.g., yield under ambient conditions and those subject to waterlogging) were compiled from a range of environments, including ﬁeld experi ments and environmentally controlled experiments. Given the diver sity in data origins and variation in units used for reporting (e.g., gplant−1 , gm−2 , kgha−1 ), we standardised grain yield dimensions to kg ha−1 before computing yield loss using Eq. (1): Yield loss % ð Þ= ðYieldck  YieldWLÞ Yieldck ×100% ð1Þ Where YieldCK is the yield (kg ha−1 ) obtained from control treatment andyieldWL representsyieldmeasuredforthewaterloggingtreatments (kg ha−1 ). Advancing the process basis of APSIM-Barley for the simulation of waterlogging We embedded the aforementioned experimental data into APSIM Barley using physiological constructs detailed below to improve the ability of the model to simulate waterlogging40 . The waterlogging tolerance genes examined here enable plants to tolerate saturated soils by accelerating aerenchyma formation and increasing root por osity following a waterlogging event. To account for this, we con ceptualised three stages of plant response and adaptation (Supplementary Fig. 9). Stage one is the immediate plant response to waterlogging at which time water supply to the plant is unlimited and with soilstrength lowered,rootgrowth has little physicalimpediment. In this phase, biological functioning is not limited by oxygen or water availability and growth processes are not affected. During the second stage, soil water pores become fully saturated and oxygen-dependent bioprocesses are negatively inﬂuenced. The default version of APSIM contains photosynthesis functions for waterlogging (oxdef_photo), but these do not account for the effects of waterlogging on phenolo gicalrate.TocomparetheimprovedversionofAPSIM(detailedbelow) with the default version, we ran the improved model twice: once with oxdef_photo set to 1, and again with these parameters using values detailed as below. To account for genetic differences in waterlogging tolerance in APSIM, we developed and added the function y_oxde f_lim_photo, where values of unity or nil equate to no stress or full stress, respectively. The third stage encompasses adaptation respon ses, the net result of which is a variable level of adaptation depending on waterlogging tolerance genetics. After the adaptation stage, geno types tolerant to waterlogging tend to exhibit similar photosynthetic rates compared with before waterlogging, analogous to plants that growaerenchymaafterwaterlogging39 ,whereasgenotypessensitiveto waterlogging can exhibit decreased growth after waterlogging events ify_oxdef_lim_photoremainslessthanunity.Wedidnotmathematically transcribe a process for crop failure under waterlogging, because in the majority of cases, waterlogging is realised as a transient event (viz. Fig. 3) and our experimental work suggests that intolerant genotypes persist for up to two months of waterlogging without failing40 . These concepts were programmed into the source code of APSIM; the executable containing the modiﬁed source code and XML ﬁles are available online: https://github.com/KeLiu7/Waterlogging-Barley. Sites for factorial simulations Soil waterlogging occurswhen soils become saturated and plant roots cannot respire, while ﬂooding refers to excessive surface water accumulation65 . Waterlogging may be present without surface ﬂood ing.Waterloggingcanbecausedbyextremerainfallevents,prolonged seasonal rainfall, poor soil hydraulic conductivity, lateral surface and/ orgroundwaterﬂows,rising/perchedwatertables,improperirrigation or combinations of these factors57 . Despite the diversity of ways in which waterlogging can occur, the result is oxygen levels in pore spaces that are insufﬁcient for plant roots to adequately respire73 . To account for soil and climatic variability across regions, simulations wereconductedusingsitesacrossthirteencountriesbasedonnational barley production and planting area. In each country, simulated sites were prioritised based on dominant soil types in cropping zones from the Digital Soil Map of the World74 . These representative sites (Sup plementaryTable3andSupplementaryFig.10)wherebarleyisgrown75 have documented reports of waterlogging76 . Soil parameters at each site (soil texture, bulk density, pH and organic carbon content etc.) were obtained from the International Soil Reference and Information Centre77 . Model calibration and evaluation In APSIM-Barley (version 7.9)78 , phenology is described in terms of thermal time accumulation using 11 crop stages and 10 phases (time between stages). Further model details, including phenology and growth are detailed in refs. 78,79 . Site-speciﬁc genotype selection, crop management(e.g.,sowingdate)werebasedonlocalexpertadviceand experimental records (Supplementary Table 3). Genotypes were cre ated such that lifecycles were in line with local sowing, ﬂowering and

Nature Communications|(2023)14:765 8maturity times80 . This was conducted by setting APSIM phenological parameters for vernalisation (vern_sens), photoperiod (photop_sens) and thermal time between emergence and the end of the juvenile phase (tt_end_of_juvenile). These parameters were chosen due to their high inﬂuence on crop ﬂowering times47 . Winter barley requires greater exposure to cold temperature to evoke reproductive devel opment, whereas spring barley ﬂowers without a cold exposure pre condition. In APSIM-Barley, vern_sens refers to vernalisation representing cumulative cold temperature requirement to initiate reproductive development (range 0–5), while photop_sens refers to day length sensitivity (range 0–5); higher values denote greater sen sitivity.Weassignedvern_sensvaluesbasedonmaturitygroup(‘spring’ maturity=1 and ‘winter’ maturity values of either 2.5 or 4, depending on vernalisation requirement)81 . Similarly, photop_sens values were set to1for‘spring’maturityand‘winter’maturityvaluesrangedfrom2.5to 4. tt_end_of juvenile values were set to 400 for ‘spring’ maturity and ‘winter’ maturity values ranged from 400 to 750. We ﬁrst para meterised vern_sens according to the maturity group, we then adjus ted photop_sens and tt_end_of juvenile until the simulated ﬂowering days match with local ﬂowering and maturity days. Waterlogging results in the inhibition of processes in the meso phyll, photoassimilate transport in the phloem, gas conductance and thus reduces photosynthetic rate57 . In APSIM-Barley, these processes are modelled per unit ground area. Effects of waterlogging on pho tosynthesis and phenology (‘waterlogging-stressdays’) weremodelled using stress indices (oxdef_photo and oxdef_pheno) computed as a function of the fraction of roots waterlogged (oxdef_photo_rtfr). For oxdef_photo_rtfr levels of 0.8 and greater,oxdef_photo and oxdef_pheno linearly decreased; for oxdef_photo_rtfr levels less than 0.8, no stress was invoked, following experimental observations39,82 . Photosynthetic and phenological stress indices were deﬁned as a function of crop stage (x_oxdef_stage_photo, x_oxdef_stage_pheno), which is a signiﬁcant advance on the majority of previous studies which assume that waterlogging stressdepends only on the extentand duration ofwater ﬁlledporespace67 .Partofthenoveltyofthecurrentworkisthedelayin phenology associated with the duration of waterlogging and the crop stage/sinwhich it occurs. Waterlogging in early growth stages inhibits leaf appearance rate and tiller development and delays ﬂowering. If waterlogging stress occurs during vegetative stages, plants may fully recoverbygrain-ﬁllingstages;ifwaterloggingoccursduringﬂowering, plants cannot fully recover pre-waterlogging photosynthetic potential before maturity40 .Effects ofwaterlogging on phenology(oxdef_pheno) were derived using information from environment-controlled experiments40 . The parameter oxdef_pheno was computed as a func tion of the fraction of roots waterlogged (oxdef_pheno_rtfr). For oxdef_pheno_rtfr levels of 0.8 or greater, oxdef_pheno linearly decreased to 0.8 until the soil is fully saturated; for oxdef_pheno_rtfr levels less than 0.8, no stress was invoked. To account for varying effects on phenology, we invoke the function y_oxdef_lim_pheno that is calculated according to crop stage (x_oxdef_stage_pheno, i.e., APSIM stage code). The y_oxdef_lim_pheno response function was adopted from our previous studies40 . For y_oxdef_lim_pheno levels less than 1, crop phenology is delayed, with y_oxdef_lim_pheno increasing from 0.65 at stage 4.0 to 0.95 to APSIM stage 5.5; for y_oxdef_lim_pheno levels greater than 1, grain-ﬁlling durations are truncated, with y_oxdef_lim_pheno increasing from 1.0 to 1.5betweenASPIMstages6and10.Thedelayedeffectonphenologyis only triggered before ﬂowering (i.e., x_oxdef_stage_pheno between 1 and 6) and the grain ﬁlling duration reduction is triggered after ﬂow ering (i.e., x_oxdef_stage_pheno greater than or equal to 6). In general, themagnitudeofdelayislargelydependedontheextentandduration of waterlogging stress, as well as its timing relative to crop develop ment. The physiological basis for waterlogging-induced delays to phenology is discussed in our previous studies40 , with the rate of leaf emergence determining the duration between emergence and anthesis83 . Waterlogging in later growth stages causes premature ﬂag leaf senescence and shortens the grain-ﬁlling period66 . Reduced grain growthinwaterloggedplantsisduetodecreasedpost-anthesiscarbon assimilation and culm reserves remobilised to grains84,85 . APSIM was initialised using the SWIM3 Module (soil water inﬁl tration and movement; Supplementary Fig. 11). To examine the extent with which the new processes described above improved the ability to simulate crop growth and development under waterlogging, we also runadefault(unimproved)versionofAPSIM-Barleywithwaterlogging. Simultaneous multi-objective optimisation63 of oxdef_photo and oxdef_pheno for each genotype was performed for waterlogging treatments by minimising the sum of squared residuals across data sets. Evaluation of phenology, biomass and yield components under waterlogging have been described in our previous peer-reviewed literature35,39,40 . Details of the waterlogging algorithms, including their implementation in the APSIM source code, are provided in peer reviewed literature40 and online: https://github.com/KeLiu7/ Waterlogging-Barley. Historical and future climate data Daily data for maximum and minimum temperature, rainfall and solar radiation for 1985–2016 at each location were obtained from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration/Prediction of World wide Energy Resources (NASA/POWER)86 . NASA/POWER provides cli mate data at a horizontal resolution of 1° latitude–longitude. Yearly atmospheric CO2 concentration [CO2] for future periods were calcu lated based on the Shared Socio-economic Pathway 585 (SSP585), a business-as-usual (high) emission scenario. This scenario most closely represents the climate trajectory to date41 . Yearly atmospheric con centrations[CO2]werecalculatedforeachyearfollowingthemethod87 that used empirical equations obtained by nonlinear least-squares regression ﬁtted to [CO2] from the 27 GCMs (see Supplementary Methods). ½CO2SSP585 =757:44+ 84:938  1:537*y

+2:4712*104 * y+15 ð Þ2 +1:9299*105 * y  1937 ð Þ*105 * y  1937 ð Þ3 +5:1137*107 * y  1910 ð Þ4 ð2Þ where y was the calendar year from 1900 to 2100 (year=1900, 1901, …, 2100). To generate climate scenarios for 2040 and 2080, monthly temperature, rainfall and radiation projected from 27 GCMs (Sup plementary Table 2) are available from the Coupled Model Inter comparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6). Here we used the statistical downscaling model (NWAI-WG)88 to downscale GCM monthly grid ded data to daily climate data for each of the study sites. Spatial downscaling was achieved by using an inverse distance-weighted (IDW) interpolation method in this study. The IDW interpolation method was used to compute rainfall and temperature values for each weather station based on its distance to the geographical centres of the four nearest GCM grid cells89 , then applied bias cor rection, resulting in bias-corrected monthly data using a relation ship derived from observations and GCM data for the historical training period of 1985–2016. Bias-corrected and downscaled GCM trends were then transcribed into time series of daily maximum and minimum temperature, rainfall and radiation using a modiﬁed sto chastic weather generator. The major advantage of this statistical downscaling method, particularly in comparison with more com putationally demanding dynamical downscaling, is that it can be easily applied to any location for which a long-term daily historical climate record is available. We did not use daily data from GCMs in this study for three reasons: ﬁrst, not all GCMs provided daily

Nature Communications|(2023)14:765 9climatedata.Second,interpolationofdailyGCMvaluescanbeerror prone, especially for rainfall. Third, weather variables such as radiation, precipitation, minimum and maximum temperature are often interdependent (e.g., rainy days are often cooler and have lower solar radiation); interpolation and bias-correction on a daily time-step can confound such interdependence88 . Instead, the approach we used (NWAI-WG bias correction of monthly values) accounts for interdependency between climatic variables89 . Factorial simulations Simulations were run from 1985 to 2100; initial soil conditions were reset annually at sowing to prevent potential ‘carry-over’ effects from previous seasons. Initial plant available water at sowing was set 15mm to ensure consistency of emergence across sites and sowing dates. Barley was sown at 180 plants m2 using a depth of 20mm and row spacing of 200mm. Nitrogen was applied as NO3 − and maintained above 200kgha−1 in the top 300mm throughout the seasonto ensure that nitrogen supply did not limit growth. This assumption was made so that waterlogging stress typologies described below were not confounded by the presence or absence of N stress. Soil texture, bulk density, pH, and organic carbon content were obtained from the International Soil Reference and Information Centre77 . Global groundwater table depths used in model initialisation were obtained from Aquaknow89 . Novel approach for clustering seasonal waterlogging-stress typologies To categorise waterlogging stress patterns, we output seasonal time courses of waterlogging stress on photosynthesis as a function of phenology (APSIM output variable oxdef_photo). Individual stresses were clustered across simulation years, sites, genotypes and manage ment. For each environment, waterlogged days (i.e., days with oxdef_photo lower than 1) were cumulated for each of six discrete growth stages (i.e., early juvenile (JV1, 10<=APSIM growth stage <21); late juvenile (JV2, 21<=APSIM growth stage <32); ﬂoral initiation to heading (FIN, 32<=APSIM growth stage <65); ﬂowering to grain ﬁlling (FIN, 65<=APSIM growth stage <71); early grain ﬁlling (GF1, 71<=APSIM growth stage <80); late grain ﬁlling (GF2, 80<=APSIM growth stage <87). oxdef_photo was averaged for each growth stage across simulation years, sites, genotypes and management. Prevailing seasonal waterlogging patterns were realised by applying unsu pervised k-means clustering to all seasonal trajectories of oxdef_photo against phenology. Clustering was applied using the R statistical package ‘stats’ (R Development Core Team, 2013), with clusters being deﬁned such that total within-cluster variation was minimised (parti tioningnobservationsintokclusters(thevalueofKisassignedasfour) where each observation belongs to the cluster with the nearest mean, i.e., the cluster centroid). Simulated impacts of waterlogging on yield The impact of waterlogging stress on crop yield for a given location was quantiﬁed by comparing the yield difference of each year simu lated by the default version of APSIM and improved APSIM with waterlogging algorithms. The yield difference caused by waterlogging (Yield percentageWL) was calculated using Eq. (3): Yield percentageWL = Yieldy  Yieldy,wl Yieldy ×100% ð3Þ WhereYieldy representssimulatedgrainyield(kgha−1 )obtainedusinga defaultAPSIMversion withaclimateperiodfrom1985–2100(Y=1985, 1986, …, 2100) and yieldWL,y represents simulated yield (kg ha−1 ) obtained from the modiﬁed version of APSIM using the aforemen tioned waterlogging algorithms for the said year. Reporting summary Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability The simulated yield data generated in this study are provided in the Source data ﬁle. Genotypic parameters used in APSIM are available in Supplementary Table 3. Soil data and downscaled climate datasets are available online (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7444483)90 . Source data are provided with this paper. Code availability The R code containing the clustering algorithm and the APSIM executable containing the improved waterlogging algorithms are available in the GitHub repository (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo. 7444483)90 .