EstimatingWheatYield Wheat producers want to know as early as pos sible what their crop yield will be,especially when the yield potential is poor.Wheat yield may be a concern due to poor plant stands,drought,flooding,late freeze, or an opportunity to plant an alternative crops with increased economic potential. To estimate yield,there must be an understanding of the difference in crop yield and yield potential. Yield potential is defined as the yield of a crop under ideal conditions.In this context,yield potential is the yield at the time of the estimation assuming favorable conditions after the evaluation takes place.Crop yield, however,is the harvested or final yield produced at the end of the growing season. When estimating wheat yield,three yield compo nents are used: heads per unit area,seeds per head,and seed weight.If the producer can accurately estimate how many tillers will produce a viable head and know the typical seed production per head,the result is yield potential. Since deciding which tillers to count is difficult, current procedures require counting all tillers.Because of variations in growing conditions,the difficulty of an accurate estimate increases with smaller wheat plants. If an estimation must be made early in the life cycle of wheat,a good method is to use equations that repre sent years of wheat evaluations.If yield estimation can be delayed until the wheat has headed,counting the number of heads per foot will increase accuracy. Although many procedures use stems per square foot for the estimation process,it is easier to simply count the number of stems in the drill row.First,mea sure the distance in inches between the wheat rows. Next,measure a given distance of a wheat row and count the number of stems or heads.As this is done, realize that counting multiple large areas results in a more accurate estimate for the first yield component. The next yield component is seeds per head.This estimation can vary considerably as the number of seeds per head can vary greatly depending on condi tions.It may be more useful to break this component into the number of spikelets and the number of seeds per spikelet.Typically,wheat plants produce 12 to 14 spikelets per head with two to four seeds per spikelet. Two seeds per spikelet will be most common and will generally result in 25 to 28 seeds per head,the most common number in Kansas being 26 seeds per head. The final yield component is seed weight,which can vary depending on growing conditions and variety. There are inherent dif ferences in seed weight among varieties and those with small seeds typically produce more heads and more seeds per head to compensate. The average value for seeds per pound is typi cally between 14,000 and 15,000 (about 30 to 32 grams thousand Table1. Estimated wheat yield for western,central,and eastern Kansas before heading. Stems per foot Row spacing (inches) for western, central, and eastern Kansas Western Kansas Central Kansas Eastern Kansas

on variety. The last two yield components,seeds per head and seed weight,can be combined in an estimate as the average seed weight per head.Kansas Agricultural Statistics has collected data to identify the average seed weight of a wheat head for western,central,or eastern Kansas.The environment,however,greatly affects the seed weight per head,which can be an additional source of error in estimating yields. Procedures forYield Estimation (Before Heading) 1) First,view the field and look for any patterns.The area to be evaluated must be representative of the field.Avoid any edges of the field or any areas that have been double drilled.If areas of the field are noticeably better than other areas,estimate the land area that belongs to each and make an esti mate for each. 2) Measure the distance between rows in inches. 3) Count the number of stems or tillers per foot of row.Note: in this step,all stems or tillers should be counted.To get the most accurate estimate,a larger area should be counted in as many locations as possible.Determine the average number of tillers per foot of row,for example,by finding the average number of tillers in four,5-foot segments of row in the field.InTable 1, follow the number of stems per foot to the area and row spacing that best corresponds to the field.For more details on the calculations and assumptions that are included in these tables, refer to the equation section. 4) Decide if the year being evaluated is an average year or if it is better or worse than average.If it is expected to be better than average, add the adjusted yield value fromTable 2 to the value fromTable 1. Conversely,if the yield expectation is poor,the adjusted yield value should be subtracted from the estimated yield. ProceduresforYieldEstimation (AfterHeading) 1) Use the procedures from the Before Heading section,except count the number of heads per foot of row. 2) Decide if the year being evaluated is an average year or if it is better or worse than average.If it is expected to be better than average,add the adjusted yield value fromTable 4 to the value in Table 3.Conversely,if the yield expectation is poor, the adjusted yield value should be subtracted from the estimated yield. Equations The following equations were used to estimate yields in the above tables.These equations were devel oped by Kansas Agricultural Statistics and are updated each year to improve the accuracy of yield estimation. Several assumptions and factors are included in these equations.For estimates before heading,the number of heads is estimated by the equation within the parenthesis (see below).These equations for the number of heads were collected over many years and locations and represent the predicted number of heads that will contribute to yield for each area of Kansas. This is then multiplied by the average seed weight per Table2. Wheat yield adjustments for western,central,and eastern Kansas before heading. Stems per foot Row spacing (inches) for western, central, and eastern Kansas Western Kansas Central Kansas Eastern Kansas

area of Kansas,which has also been observed over many years and locations.This is all divided by the row spacing and multiplied by a conversion factor to allow for a simple calculation resulting in bushels per acre.When yield is estimated after heading,the number of heads no longer has to be estimated.So, the number of heads is multiplied by the average head seed weight and converted to bushels per acre.By removing one large assumption,assess ments after heading are more accurate than before heading. Western Kansas Yield estimated before heading (bu) = (stems per foot × 0.531 + 8.5) × 0.531 × 19.213 row spacing (inches) Yield estimated after heading (bu) = heads per foot × 0.513 × 19.213 row spacing (inches) Adjustments to yield: Replace the coefficient 0.513 with 0.409 for a poor year or 0.618 for a good year. Central Kansas Yield estimated before heading (bu) = (stems per foot × 0.489 + 8.0) × 0.601 × 19.213 row spacing (inches) Yield estimated after heading (bu) = heads per foot × 0.601 × 19.213 row spacing (inches) Adjustments to yield: Replace the coefficient 0.601 with 0.510 for a poor year or 0.692 for a good year. Eastern Kansas Yield estimated before heading (bu) = (stems per foot × 0.403 + 13.1) × 0.679 × 19.213 row spacing (inches) Yield estimated after heading (bu) = heads per foot × 0.679 × 19.213 row spacing (inches) Adjustments to yield: Replace the coefficient 0.679 with 0.573 for a poor year or 0.784 for a good year. Example A field in central Kansas is evaluated before heading.It has 7.5-inch row spacing and after thor ough observation,the average number of stems per foot is 20.It has been an average year,which is expected to continue.Twenty will be entered into the central Kansas equation before heading.

Then,17.8 will be multiplied by 0.601 to get 10.7. This number,10.7,will be divided by 7.5 and multi plied by 19.213 to attain approximately 27 bushels per acre.By following through these numbers onTable 1, the yield will also be estimated at 27 bushels per acre. Table3. Estimated wheat yield for western,central,and eastern Kansas after heading. Heads per foot Row spacing (inches) for western, central, and eastern Kansas Western Kansas Central Kansas Eastern Kansas

30, 1914, as amended. Kansas State University, County Extension Councils, Extension Districts, and United States Department of Agriculture Cooperating, Gary Pierzynski,Interim Director. Errors inYield Estimation Any yield estimation is subject to substantial errors depending on environmental conditions after the estimation takes place.When the estimation is conducted early in the growing season,there is more opportunity for environmental conditions to affect the yield in ways that cannot be predicted.For example, an assessment of western Kansas yield is 50 bushels per acre in an average year.If conditions after the evaluation are favorable,the yield may be greater than initially estimated.Also,the opposite may be true,and conditions could reduce yield below the expected estimate.In either case, it should be recognized that some error occurs with the evaluation. Summary Estimating wheat yields can be beneficial for planning and bud geting.The procedures presented in this document are based on sound,data-based yield estimation equations. During estimations, the evaluator must fully understand what plants and plant parts to count so the equations can be used correctly. As with anything that depends on representa tive samples,a larger area and number of samples evaluated decreases the error that comes from vari ability within the field.Although doing an attentive job of collecting this data can minimize variability, error will still be present and should be considered.

The authors would like to thank National Agricul tural Statistics Service/Kansas Agricultural Statistics. Additional information for NASS/Kansas Agricultural Statistics can be found at www.nass.usda.gov/Statis tics_by_State/Kansas. Table4. Wheat yield adjustments for western,central,and eastern Kansas after heading. Heads per foot Row spacing (inches) for western, central, and eastern Kansas Western Kansas Central Kansas Eastern Kansas

KentMartin Former Crops and Soils Specialist JimShroyer Crop Production DougShoup Crops and Soils Specialist Brand names appearing in this publication are for product identification purposes only. No endorsement is intended, nor is criticism implied of similar products not mentioned. Publications from Kansas State University are available at: www.ksre.ksu.edu Publications are reviewed or revised annually by appropriate faculty to reflect current research and practice. Date shown is that of publication or last revision. Contents of this publication may be freely reproduced for educational purposes. All other rights reserved. In each case, credit Kent Martin et al., Wheat Yield Estimation, Kansas State University, December 2011 BrianOlson Former Crops and Soils Specialist StewartDuncan Crops and Soils Specialist