Estimating Wheat Residue Maintaining crop residue is an integral component of practices to con trol soil erosion and will be part of most conservation plans written for the conservation compliance provision of the 1985 Farm Bill. Residue amount can be reported in three ways: percent cover, pounds per acre (lbs/A) and small grain equivalent (SGe). Percent cover: the percentage of soil surface covered with crop residue; commonly used where sheet and rill erosion (water erosion) is the primary concern and usually evaluated immediately after planting. Pounds per acre: the weight of clean, dry residue expressed on a per acre basis; can be used where water and/or wind erosion is the primary con cern. Small grain equivalent (SGe): relates the type, amount, and orienta tion of residue to its equivalent in pounds per acre of small grain residue in a reference condition. (Reference condition is defined as 10-inch-long stalks of small grain parallel to the wind direction lying flat in rows spaced 10 inches apart). Small grain equivalent is commonly used where wind erosion is the primary erosion concern and is evaluated during the critical wind erosion period, usually November through April. The SGe of various residues or crops can be determined by using SGe charts (see Fig. 1 for wheat). To use the chart, find lbs/A of wheat residue on the x-axis, locate the plot of inter est, and read the SGe from the y-axis. Example: 600 lbs/A of flat wheat residue is equivalent to 1,050 lbs/A of SGe. Methods for estimating residue Estimating residue can be useful in planning field operations to control soil erosion or to determine whether adequate residue remains to qualify for conservation compliance programs. Three methods to estimate residue are described. Line-transect method: This is an easy, reliable method to determine percent cover. It involves stretching a 50- or 100-foot tape (or string with knots) diagonally across crop rows. Check residue directly under every 1-foot mark or knot. Percent cover is equal to the percentage of marks over residue “hits” compared to the total number of marks evaluated. Example: if 19 out of 50 marks are over residue, percent cover would equal 38. If there is any doubt that residue under a mark could absorb the impact of a rain drop, do not count it as a “hit.” Photo-comparison method: Comparing residue in the field to photo graphs of known amounts can be used to estimate residue expressed as per cent cover, lbs/A, or SGe (see over). Visual estimates must be made looking straight down at the soil surface for flat residue and at an angle for standing residue. Scanning the residue from the road is not adequate and will overes timate residue amounts. Calculation method: The initial amount of residue after harvest (lbs/A) is calculated by multiplying the wheat residue coefficient (100 lbs residue/ bushel grain) by the long-term yield (ex. 35 bu/A wheat is equivalent to 3,500 lbs/A residue after harvest). Percent cover after harvest can be as sumed at 95, although actual amount will vary by year, with production practices, and geographically, and should be adjusted accordingly. The ini tial amount of wheat residue in lbs/A or percent cover can be reduced for overwinter weathering, grazing, tillage and planting operations by the fol lowing amounts. John S. Hickman Daryl L. Schoenberger Extension Specialist Extension Assistant Soil and Water Conservation Agronomy Tillage and planting implements Moldboard plow Chisel plow Straight shovel points Twisted shovel points Knife-type fertilizer applicator Disk (tandem or offset) 3 inches deep 6 inches deep Field cultivator Sweep V-blade Rodweeder Planters No coulter or smooth coulter Narrow ripple coulter Wide fluted coulter Sweeps or double disk furrowers Drills Disk openers Hoe openers Winter weathering Percent of residue remaining after each operation 10 75 60 80 70 60 80 90 95 90 95 90 85 80 95 80 90 Following is an example using the calculation method. This method gives only a rough estimate of residue cover because of the many assump tions involved. Operation Residue cover Residue weight and SGel After harvest 95% 3,500 lbs/A Overwinter x0.90 x0.90 Chisel (straight points) x0.75 x0.75 Disk (3 inches deep) x0.70 x0.70 Field cultivate x0.80 x0.80 Drill (disk opener) x0.95 x0.95 After planting 34% 1,250 lbs/A (2,000 lbs/A SGe) 1 Assuming 35 bu/A wheat (35 bu/A x 100 lb/bu = 3,500 lbs/A) Figure 1: Small grain equivalents of wheat residues. FundsforthisprojectwerecontributedbytheKansasSoilConservationServiceandtheKansasStateConservationCommission.

L-781 May 1989 Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension Work, acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, as amended. Kansas State University, County Extension Councils, and United States Department of Agriculture Cooperating, Walter R. Woods. Director. All educational programs and materials available wthout discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or handicap. 5-89—90M; 9-89—60M File Code: Crops and Soils 4–5 (Soil Conservation)