Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

By Howard M. Rawson Crop Physiologist Canberra, Australia and Helena Gómez Macpherson Cereals Officer Crop and Grassland Service Plant Production and Protection Division

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Rome, 2000

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing and Multimedia Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy or by e-mail to [email protected]

Five tenets for managers - the sections of the book Steps you can take to identify and solve crop problems

Section 1: Reflecting on your farming system

What is your target yield? Characteristics of a 5t/ha crop as it grows

Section 2: Describing the growth of your crop as stages. During which stages is yield determined?

The Zadoks decimal growth stages The internal stages that drive development External & internal stages and when yield is formed Pictures to help identify all the Zadoks (Z) growth stages

Section 3: Assessing and measuring your crop

Why bother with measurement? Using your senses to assess problems in your crop First level of assessment: your eyeball check list Where, how and what to sample in the field? A numerical assessment Field sheets. A guide to recording your observations

Section 4: Check lists for problem identification

Check list for planting to the two-leaf stage (Z0.0 to Z1.2) Check list for three-leaf stage to spike emergence (Z1.3 to Z5.0) Check list for to early kernel growth (Z5.0 to Z7.02) Check list for to harvest ripeness (Z6.8 to Z9.2)

Section 5: Problem description and solutions

Temperature effects Low temperature Sunlight effects Acid or alkaline soils Saline soils

Poor crop stands. Why? Land preparation Seed viability Planting depth and method Optimum sowing time Optimum seed rate The crop canopy: control of tillers and spikes The crop canopy: green leaves after heading Lodging Mineral nutrition Weeds Crop Residues Irrigation timing and moisture stress Waterlogging

Above-ground insects Soil pests Diseases

Section 6: Explanations of plant development

What advances wheat through its developmental stages? Thermal time and heat sums Base and optimum temperature Photoperiod & vernalization also change rate of development

Minimum and zero tillage Raised beds for irrigated wheat