Growth guides for wheat, barley and oilseed rape

Seed quality and vigour are affected by variety and seed crop ripening. The germination capacity/potential of seed lots should be established, in addition to the need for fungicide seed treatments.

Seedborne diseases and germination of cereals: tests and thresholds

Germination and emergence require moisture and warmth.

Initially, healthy seeds imbibe water, roots start to grow, coleoptiles emerge and extend to the soil surface, then first leaves emerge.

A proportion of viable seeds fail to emerge due to pests, diseases and poor soil conditions.

Establishment declines if sowing is delayed after mid-October and will be around 50% of seeds sown in mid-November.

While sowing to emergence takes longer in cold than in warm weather, the thermal time in each case is similar (150ºC days).

Sowing too deep or too shallow can delay or decrease establishment.

Optimum sowing depth is around 4 cm but depends on pest threats (e.g. slugs and rooks).

Benchmark: 70% of seeds sown established

Other influences: Soil, weather, cultivations, seed treatments, seed rate, sowing depth, diseases, pests

Soil type and cultivations affect establishment. For example, average establishment on sandy soils is 90%, compared with 65% on loams and clays. Cultivations affect seedbed quality and establishment, depending on soil stability and type.

Plant damage or loss over winter may also occur due to frost heave and frost damage (especially after early drilling of fast-developing varieties)

Plant population density depends on seeds sown and establishment.

The proportion of seeds sown that emerge also appears to decrease as the number of seeds sown/m 2 increases, although the reasons for this are unclear.

In contrast to barley, tillering tends to compensate for uneven establishment.

It is important to ensure poorly established crops have adequate fertiliser nitrogen (N). It may even be possible to counteract poor establishment by using fertiliser N to encourage tillering and tiller survival. Very few plants die after winter.

Eventual crop structure is markedly affected by surviving plants/m 2 (see figure, below).

The most appropriate target plant population depends on weed pressure and sowing date – the target should be about 150 plants/m 2 in the thinnest areas of the field and more if it is necessary to compete against weeds.

An estimate of cereal plant populations will indicate if target populations have been met.

How to measure plant and tiller populations