The Penn State Agronomy Guide is designed as a quick reference for information on crop and soil management, including varieties, nutritional requirements, establishment, and harvesting; storing seed and grain; and farm management and budgeting. Recommendations for managing weed, insect, and disease pests in corn, grain sorghum, soybean, small grains, and forages are provided in Part 2.

This comprehensive guide is revised biennially by Penn State Extension specialists in agronomy, entomology, and plant pathology; U.S. Pasture Laboratory staff; county extension educators; seed, fertilizer, lime, and pesticide industry personnel; and representatives of state agricultural and environmental government agencies.

The current version was released in January 2025.

Farm managers, producers, and growers on farms of any size

Crop management (corn, grain sorghum, small grains, forages, cover crops), soil management (soil fertility management, nontraditional soil amendments), organic crop production basics, enterprise budgeting, and pest management for corn, sorghum, soybean, small grains, and forages

Some publications are available in both digital and print versions, but some are only available in one version. Please refer to the publication description to learn whether a specific publication is available in digital, print, or both.

You will have access to the digital publication from your account in My Educational Content > Downloadable Publications .

When you purchase a digital publication, you will have unlimited access to the publication from your account in My Educational Content > Downloadable Pulications. However, you can only access the version you purchased. If a new edition is released, you will need to purchase the new version to have access to the new version.

No. We are sorry, but digital publications cannot be shared with multiple people.

Shipping is dependent on the weight of the publication as well as the quantity ordered. You will receive an accurate quote for shipping during checkout and prior to completing your purchase.

You will receive a tracking link when your order has been shipped. Orders are typically shipped out within two to three business days.

You can sign up for an out-of-stock alert on the publication page and we will send you an email notification when the publication is back in stock.

Yes, our publications are available in alternative format upon request. Please use the Alternate Format Request form to make a request. We will be glad to assist you.

Please submit your question or comment through the Contact Us form and we will be glad to assist you.