Understanding growth stages of wheat is important in matching management decisions and inputs with plant development. On the following pages, characteristics and management decisions are outlined that may be associated with indicated stages of plant growth.

There are at least five scales commonly used worldwide to describe stages of growth of wheat and other small grains. The scale used is not important, as long as the grower has a thorough understanding of the growth habit of wheat and how management inputs at specific growth stages can affect forage and grain yield.

Probably the most widely used scale in the U.S. is the Feekes scale, although the Zadoks and Haun scales are more detailed and descriptive. Careful study of the developing crop and an intimate knowledge of factors which may have positive or negative effects on forage and grain yield potential can enhance management decisions. These decisions can make wheat production more profitable.

This article discusses management of the wheat crop in terms of the Feekes growth scale and provides visuals of those growth stages.

Feekes 4.0 Beginning of erect growth, leaf sheaths lengthen

Take great care with grazing operations, particularly on short wheats, during this growth stage. Final plant size, leaf area, and yield are closely related to the severity of grazing. This is true of wheat harvested for grain and wheat intended for graze-out. Tall wheats are more tolerant of severe grazing at this stage of growth. Rotate cattle with a goal of leaving a minimum 3 to 4 inches of green leaf area going into Feekes 6.0.

Small grains can still show good response to N topdressed at this time, although yield responses will be better at Feekes 5.0 as head size can no longer be affected by fertilizer application. Mechanical injury to wheat can occur from fertilizer applicators at this stage of growth, but response to applied N will usually more than compensate for the damage if soil N is deficient.

Feekes 7.0 Second node visible next to last leaf visible.

If a positive answer applies to the first three questions, and a negative response to the last, plans should be made to protect the crop, especially the emerging flag leaf, from further damage. Check product labels and apply as soon as possible. In most situations, the greatest return to applied foliar fungicides comes from application at Feekes stage 8.0 to 9.0. There is a considerable debate about pre-emptive applications of fungicides to prevent future infestations of fungal diseases. In certain high disease and high yield environments, this may be justified.

Nitrogen applications at Feekes 8.0 and later can enhance grain protein levels, but are questionable with respect to added yield.

Irrigation scheduling becomes most critical between Feekes 8.0 and mid-grain (Feekes 11.1). The crop should not be stressed from about 10 days prior to bloom through the late milk stage. Feekes 8.0 marks a point in the development of the wheat plant beyond which every effort should be made to apply water to prevent loss in grain yield potential.

Feekes 10.1 Boot stage awns visible Feekes 10.5.1 Beginning flowering