102 FP4: Sustainable intensification of wheat-based farming systems 2.4.1 Rationale, scope Strategic efforts to boost wheat productivity can increase smallholders’ food and income security, while also improving livelihoods, natural resource integrity, equity, nutrition and health, and resilience against biophysical or socio-economic shocks, all of which are urgent development priorities. Most smallholder wheat farmers' livelihoods do not however depend exclusively on wheat. Rather, their farming systems are generally characterized by complex strategies that integrate crop and livestock production, often with increasing reliance on off-farm income, and a strong risk management component that can hamper the adoption of innovations that focus on wheat yield alone. FP4 focuses on sustainable intensification (SI) research in high-poverty concentration geographies, both subsistence and smallholder market-integrated wheat-based systems, in South and Central Asia, Latin America, Ethiopia, Morocco. SI encompasses a number of dimensions, including (a) production of more food, feed, fuel and/or fiber per unit of land, labor, and/or capital used, particularly by closing yield gaps and increasing yield per unit of time and area, (b) conservation of critical agroecosystem regulatory and provisioning services, and (c) farming system resilience to shocks and stresses, including those posed by climate change and poorly functioning markets, while (d) seeking to address social justice, gender equity, and youth inclusivity, and human well-being (Loos et al., 2014; Pretty et al., 2011; Vanlauwe et al., 2014; Zurek et al., 2014). Research within FP4 therefore offers the potential to simultaneously address a number of sustainable development objectives, all of which are central to SI. These include eliminating poverty and hunger, improving access to clean water, facilitating responsible production and consumption, addressing climate change, and protection of natural areas from conversion to agricultural use, while reversing land degradation. Technologies, management practices, and agricultural innovation systems developed and deployed through this flagship will enable women, men and young farmers to improve livelihoods with farm-level incomes that contribute to the base of the agrifood system. The flagship will aid in the reduction of economic risk, produce more or less the same amount of wheat with fewer external inputs, despite climate change and other stresses, and with a healthier impact on the environment. FP4 target groups include poor farm households in systems where wheat is a major cereal contributing to food and income security. Research will be designed in such a way as to emphasize links with the remainder of the wheat agrifood system, and to leverage linkages with other flagships (particularly 5.1 and 5.2). The agro ecologies in which resource-poor wheat farmers operate are typically characterized by socioeconomic and environmental heterogeneity -farmers tend to spread risks and diversity by depending on other commodities (cash crops, legumes, livestock), and off-farm income to sustain livelihoods. Therefore, regionally adapted agronomic solutions are key; there is no silver bullet to assure the sustainability of wheat agrifood systems. Under FP4, WHEAT maintains existing collaborations with other CRPs on 45 innovation platforms, most prominently GRiSP, MAIZE, PIM, Dryland Systems and CCAFS. At the core of FP4 are system analytical approaches, the products of which will leverage social, political and biophysical diversity at farm and landscape scales, working across regions:  Breadbasket regions where bringing sustainability to intensive production systems is urgent: Increasing resource use efficiencies (irrigation water, nitrogen, phosphorous), maintaining high and stable yields (e.g. NW Mexico, the Indo-Gangetic Plains (IGP), Horn of Africa and southern Africa).  Regions at risk of heat-stress: Global wheat yields are expected to decline under climate change. Productivity levels are already threatened by terminal heat stress in the tropics, where smallholder wheat farmers predominate (Koehler et al. 2013). FP4 tackles these problems103 focusing on G  E  M interactions, and cropping systems that assure timely planting. For example, this occurs through mechanized rice harvesting and use of short-duration rice genotypes for early wheat establishment in the IGP (Krupnik et al. 2015), where 1.6 billion people – nearly 40% of whom live in extreme poverty – rely on wheat-rice rotations for food security (FAO 2014).  Regions with rainfed and partially irrigated systems: In environments where farmers rely on unpredictable rainfall, or where pumped water resources are scarce and the energetic and economic costs of irrigation are high, conservation agriculture (CA) based management practices can boost water productivity and reduce energy requirements, thorough research is needed to fine and assure that smallholders are able to adopt CA practices.  Regions where input and output markets are limiting: Investment in intensified cropping practices limited where appropriate input availability is low, or where output markets poorly developed. Research in FP4 responds using innovation systems approaches and methodologies to develop scalable interventions to overcome such limitations to the agri-food system.  Regions where labor resources are constrained: Farmers are increasingly reliant on off-farm income and migratory labor. In particular, parts of the IGP for example, male-outmigration has led to the increasing feminization of agriculture, indicating a need to develop labor-efficient technologies using scale-appropriate agricultural machinery (Krupnik et al. 2014; Baudron et al. 2015). 2.4.2 Objectives and targets Flagship outcomes and structure FP4 is designed around four mutually-reinforcing clusters of activities (CoAs) that address key objectives and targets: 4.1 Multi-scale farming system framework to better integrate and enhance adoption of sustainable intensification options; 4.2 Integration of technological and institutional options in rural livelihood systems; 4.3 Multi-criteria evaluation and participatory adaptation of cropping systems; 4.4 Partnership and collaborations models for scaling. FP4’s primary outcomes (see also Tables 3, 4 and 5, section 1.2) include three CGIAR results framework sub-IDOs: (1) More efficient use of inputs; (2) Closed yield gaps through improved agronomic and animal husbandry practices; and (3) agricultural systems diversified and intensified in ways that protect soils and water. Five CGIAR cross-cutting issues are also addressed through sub-IDOs: (1) enhanced capacity to deal with climatic risks and extremes; (2) improved capacity of women and youth in decision-making; (3) increased capacity of beneficiaries to adopt research outputs; (4) enhanced institutional capacity of partner research organizations (and others involved in sustainable intensification); and (5) increased capacity for innovation in partner research organizations (and others involved in sustainable intensification). WHEAT’s FP4 theory of change (Figure FP4-1) systematically addresses threats to the agronomic basis of the wheat agri-food system, and is aligned with the CGIAR Strategy and Results Framework, with outcomes contributing through sub-IDO’s to WHEAT’s SLO contribution, including reduced poverty, improved food and nutrition security and improved natural resource systems and ecosystems services.104 Draft indicators and metrics, and monitoring framework for sustainable intensification (Table FP 4 -1; to be confirmed during the operationalization of the RBM framework). FP4 WHEAT indicators address both the ToC and W3 donor requirements. For SI, field level indicators are mainly related to “efficiency” and enhanced ecosystem services contributing to yield stability and resilience. Household level indicators focus on livelihood measures, including food security, income, investment (labor, cash), assets and social networks (capacity) each gender and age differentiated, while at community to landscape scales the focus is on ecological costs (land degradation, soil health), social equity, measuring investments by partners and donors to indicate procedural change in the food system. Select examples are given in the table below. Large economies of scale and improved M&E&L are expected from harmonizing SI indicator definitions and monitoring approaches across CRPs. Table FP 4-1. Indicators, metrics, and monitoring framework for sustainable intensification. Research Outputs Scale Field Farm or system Landscape Institutional Productivity research (soil, water, biotic); Systems research (optimization, adaptation, design for future) Markets & institutions; Enabling ‘Last mile providers’ (knowledge & capacity products); Tools & DSS (targeting, prioritization, trade-offs); M&L&E Shorter term -Nutrient, water & labor use; -Nutrient, water & labor efficiency; Indicators: Number of farm households adopting improved wheat varieties and/or improved crop management practices Shorter term - Food sufficiency & security; - Income & Assets; - Investment & ROI of (system) technology; Indicators: Number of men and women assisted to exit poverty Shorter term - Availability of wheat; - Price change Indicators: Number of men and women meeting minimum dietary energy requirements Shorter term -No. extension workers trained; -No. farmers reached (early adoption); -Use of outputs/products by ‘providers’ Indicators: Evidence of knowledge into use by NARES (methods), extension, NGOs, and other development partners (training materials) Longer term Soil health (C, % org, nutrient balance) Indicators: Land degradation/erosion /soil health indicators at the field level including populations and proxies for critical soil faunal species Longer term System health (nutrient cycling, biodiversity, biomass) Indicators: Land degradation/erosio n/soil health indicators at the farm levels Longer term - Land-use change; - Soil loss/ degradation; - Soil health (AFSIS); - Net productivity (vegetation, biomass); Ecosystem services (biodiversity, water) Indicators: Increase in water and nutrient (inorganic, biological) use efficiency in agro-ecosystems, including through recycling and reuse. Longer term -Use of outputs/products by ‘providers’; -Capacity/ performance of ‘providers’ (no. employees, loan repayment etc.); -Investment by value chain actors; Indicators: Livelihood and institutional indicators 2.4.3 Impact pathway and theory of change The FP Sustainable Intensification’s theory of change was developed during a workshop with the Flagship project teams from both MAIZE and WHEAT CRPs. A participatory approach was used to capture all views, experiences and known evidence into the theory of change. The workshop participants were able to increase their understanding of the CGIAR Strategy and Results Framework and awareness of results-based management concepts. The workshop was also structured to encourage sharing and learning on a variety of topics and across both CRPs.105 Using the CGIAR Results Framework’s sub-intermediate development outcomes (IDOs) the team agreed to focus on three sub-IDOs and five cross-cutting sub-IDOs: 1.3.4 More efficient use of inputs; 1.4.2 Closed yield gaps through improved agronomic and animal husbandry practices; 3.2.2 Agricultural systems diversified and intensified in ways that protect soils and water; A.1.4 Enhanced capacity to deal with climatic risks and extremes; B.1.3 Improved capacity of women and young people in decision-making; C.1.1 increased capacity of beneficiaries to adopt research outputs; D.1.1. Enhanced institutional capacity of partner research organizations; and D.1.3 Increased capacity for innovation in partner research organizations. Other sub-IDOs were noted by the team as important to programming given that they overlap with the above sub-IDOs of focus. The team identified several of the cross-cutting sub-IDOs as part of the research and development outcome component of the impact pathway, noting their importance in contributing to the achievement of immediate and intermediate outcomes. Based on these areas of focus, the team agreed that this Flagship project contributes to reducing poverty (SLO 1), improving food and nutrition security for health (SLO2) and improving natural resource system and ecosystem services (SLO3) by the mean of increasing incomes and employment (IDO 1.3), increasing productivity (IDO 1.4), enhancing benefits from ecosystem goods and services (IDO 3.2) and enhancing the cross-cutting issues of climate change (A), gender and youth (B), policies and institutions (C), and capacity development (D). A number of research and development outcomes were identified and a pathway of change was created demonstrating the causal relationship between outcomes and sub-IDOs. During this process, partners involved in the pathway of change were identified. Current and proposed interventions and associated outputs to support the achievements of the outcomes were mapped. Assumptions describing the contextual underpinnings of the theory as well as the risks that may have the potential to undermine success were documented. This theory of change will be the foundation for the monitoring, evaluation and learning plan. The monitoring plan will consist of a continuous process of collection and analysis of data based on a set of indicators directly related to the performance of the CRP at the output and outcome levels; the key assumptions of the theories of change; and the critical risks. The theory of change will also be the basis for evaluating the Flagship project as well as reflecting on lessons and program improvements.106  Assumptions and Risks  Interventions and Outputs  SI practices and products are adaptable to other environments and systems.  Smallholder farmers see benefits and are able to adopt/adapt SI practices and products  Smallholder farmers see value in achieving more efficient use of inputs, closing yield gap, and diversifying and intensifying agricultural systems Smallholder farmers are aware and have access to SI practices and products  Actors in SI are willing/able to participate in research, capacity building and/or improving the enabling environment for adoption of SI practices and products  Common interest among actors  Actors in SI act to contribute to gender responsiveness and social inclusion  Private sector recognizes importance of SI  Risks: business interest negatively effects the adoption of SI practices and products; potential for emergence of ethical issues  Partners have interest and power to share the enabling environment  Risk: Frequent conflicting and competing priorities negatively effects the research in and adoption of SI practices/products  Co-research processes lead to integration of SI into educational and R4D programs  CRP has understanding of the institutional landscape and has the means to influence it  Actors in SI are reached  Need and incentive for intensification  SI practices and products address locally important challenges and opportunities  Organization sufficiently recognizes or incentivises importance of knowledge sharing, innovation, and critical thinking  Risks: Focus placed on publications instead of overall ToC results  Risks: Financial, social and political instability, climate change  Research:  Technological options for sustainable intensification of cropping systems  Sustainable farming systems and livelihood intensification strategies  Enabling policies and sustainable intensification landscape  Outputs: technologies, policies, decision support tools, extension programs, publications  Develop and implement communication and marketing strategy  Outputs: Communication and marketing strategy  Develop and implement a partnership/networking strategy  Outputs: Partnership/networking strategy  Provide training (on the job, workshops, short and long term training)  Arrange exchange visits  Brokering (management and dissemination) of knowledge (to all partners)  Contribution to the development of decision support materials  Contribute to business promotional materials  Business model development  Joint product development  Outputs: training material, promotional products, decision support tools, communication products  Creating of innovation platforms  Gender and social inclusion analysis and identification of appropriate interventions  Gender and social inclusion workshops  Outputs: innovative platforms, gender responsive and socially inclusive interventions, gender and social inclusion sensitization training materials Figure FP4-1. Impact pathway and theory of change (ToC) for WHEAT FP4: Sustainable Intensification. A C D E F G H I B 3 2 I 1 I107 2.4.4 Science quality FP4 builds on a solid scientific foundation from WHEAT Phase-1. The peer-reviewed publication list from the lead-CGIAR team (CIMMYT SIP and SEP programs under MAIZE, WHEAT and CCAFS) during 2012 Jan2016 period is given below. http://wheat.org/download/wheat-publications/ provides a complete list of publications by WHEAT scientists (FP1 – FP4) and separately for FP4. It comprises 195 publications (many in journals having an impact factor above 2), and a number of additional high-impact journals in which one publication was logged, for example PNAS and Energy (9.674 and 4.844, respectively). A large majority of these publications are co-authored by CGIAR colleagues and collaborating scientists from ARIs and NARS (Table FP 4-2). The contribution of DS scientists to Phase II will further strengthen the scientific team involved in FP4. Table FP4-2. Journals in which the SI team has published more than twice since January 2012 (representing only 59% of all publications registered). There is a clear evolution regarding the scope of SI publications. In the early CRP-I period, focus was placed primarily on field level research. But since then, the publication portfolio has evolved to a more balanced one including increasingly SI oriented systems research at the farm/landscape level, utilizing multi-criteria analyses, modeling, and the stronger application of systems oriented methodological approaches to addresses the complexity of SI challenges (as seen from the number of papers in Agricultural Systems and Agriculture, Ecosystems, and Environment). Lessons learned in Phase-I indicated that interdisciplinary collaboration sheds light on the key factors limiting the successes of SI interventions, while also highlighting new opportunities for research and development to overcome them. To this end, the FP4 SI team is comprised of a mix of soil scientists, systems agronomists, farming systems analysts, and researchers involved in innovation systems and adoption research. Key research questions and approaches for FP 4.1 include:  How can the development of farm typologies using a common methodology in pilot areas representative of the main wheat farming systems be used to tailor training and adoption messaging?  What are the main causes of yield gaps at the landscape scale and what are the entry points for addressing them? Systematic networks of crop-cuts, remote sensing (e.g., use of UAV), and108 collection of farmers’ practices data, disaggregated by farm type, will identify the main causes of yield gaps and provide actionable recommendations for specific farm types.  How can wheat-livestock systems be harnessed in the context of SI practice? What options to minimize tradeoffs and maximize synergies between crop and livestock sub-systems?  How can water resources be more efficiently used to support SI at different scales?  How can the alternative landscape configurations be designed for improved delivery and maintenance of ecosystem services (e.g., pest control, freshwater provision for irrigation in estuarine environments), nutrition and resilience (self-organization) be made actionable? Key research questions and approaches for FP 4.2 include:  How can tools and methods for the assessment of agricultural (innovation) systems and the participatory identification of socio-technical and institutional options for SI in multi-stakeholder configurations (incl. innovation platforms) be used more effectively?  Why do (ICT-based) decision-support tools for farmers, service providers, extensionists and development actors success or fail, and how can they be improved? Research will identify where the most high impact opportunities for ICTs are, and then work to co-design decision-support tools with service providers operating different scales in agricultural (innovation) systems), while embedding them in existing stakeholder networks.  How can new quantitative and qualitative methods for the assessment of the (uneven) adoption of socio-technical SI options into diverse livelihood systems be used to study and resolve their inequality effects? Acknowledging that agricultural change involves of both socio-institutional and technical components, FP 4.2 develops methods and tools to improve on current adoption studies that are too linear and focused on individual decision-making (Sumberg et al. forthcoming). Key research questions and approaches for FP 4.3 include:  How can wheat be adapted to = climate change, with emphasis on G x E x M interactions (WHEAT FP2.4, 3.1 collaboration; docking CCAFS FP 1)?  How can yield gaps be most effectively bridged in the context of smallholder wheat based cropping systems? Research to bridge yield gaps will first proceed with the evaluation and deployment of appropriate criteria to scientifically assessed attainable yield targets in a diversity of production environments and farm typologies (building on FP 4.1). Long term research trials and field experiments are key to this research.  Can potential yields of genotypes under specific circumstances be increased with agronomic management (what is the role of G x E x M in bridging yield gaps)? What are interactions of agronomic management on physiological processes (for example photosynthetic efficiency), and how much can be translated to yield?  How can yields be increased while optimizing nutrient, water, and energy? Research devise management practices for water, nutrient and organic residues under different production systems and ecologies, and how this informs decision support tool and precision sensor development (linking to FP 4.2).  How can farmers capture the interactions of management practices to reach attainable yield targets given nutrient (N, P, K), water requirements (spatial and temporal) and organics (residue retention) management for a range of cropping systems and agro-ecologies.109  How can soil resource degradation be best arrested? Plot-level and processes research will help identify synergies and tradeoffs of improved agronomic management practices in wheat systems. Key research questions and approaches for FP 4.4 include:  How can multi-actor innovation networks be best used for scaling: Research is needed to better understand scaling-up processes and ensure sustainability of institutional mechanisms and structures. Learning, internal and external, is a key process that will need to be institutionalized.  How can viable business models be developed to support SI: To provide new insights into on what and how to concentrate on scaling-up processes through business models and Business model appraisal, design and evaluation for the provision of technological products and services in support of smallholder intensification.  How can knowledge management through ICT and social networking be used for scaling-up? Understanding the complex interaction between the enabling environment and the business propositions for ICT services.  What builds scaling partners’ capacity to innovate, and how can this capacity be increased and leveraged for scaling? What are the roles of innovation systems and hubs in scaling? What are their limitations? Currently understudied, this research will provide new insights on the role of innovation brokers and other actors in building smallholders’ entrepreneurship skills  How can public-private partnerships and technology commercialization be used for scaling? The relationship between market-oriented production and productivity increases is not well understood. Findings are expected to reinforce the need to consider both input and output markets in support of SI.  How can gender equity and youths’ priorities be addressed in scaling up agricultural technologies and management practices? To reinforce our understanding of the adoption, adaptation and scaling- up processes, recognizing that market demand is a major trigger of innovation. 2.4.5 Lessons learnt and unintended consequences Key lessons learned during Phase I: Research during Phase I generated key insights into wheat SI technologies, indicating that (i) a great amount of data have been produced on G  E  M through trials that have not been fully capitalized upon, as a robust geospatial framework for more effective targeting and monitoring of research and impacts remains lacking, and (ii) assessment of agronomic technologies and management practices must go beyond yield and specific resource-use efficiency measures such as water and economic profitably, to incorporate more comprehensive analysis (Fischer et al. 2014). Such assessments must take into account socio-environmental criteria made possible by developing standardized protocols for multi-criteria assessments of advanced crop management technologies (see External Evaluation recommendations 1, 8 here). Dryland Systems CRP research indicated that improvements to the performance of a farming system requires attention to factors in addition to those that close yield gaps. These include how better management of land, water, crop and livestock diversity interact and can contribute to profitability, environmental conservation and resilience to abiotic and biotic stresses. Additionally, (iii) the nature and diversity of SI interventions can be overwhelming (Giller et al., 2010); therefore, systems approaches and tools are needed to generate clear research results, so that complex information can be translated for relevance, and can move into the hands of smallholders110 and development partners more rapidly. Understanding farmer perception, farmer diversity, and the farm-level integration of technologies is therefore essential for success. Beyond the field level, Phase I research has indicated that (i) the diversity of smallholder wheat based farming systems and communities influence the use of SI interventions within different wheat based agrifood systems, excluding “one-size-fits-all” or silver bullet “solutions.” In addition, (ii) tools and methods for better targeting are urgently needed, along with clear metrics to understand the contribution of interventions on smallholder livelihood strategies and resilience (López-Ridaura et al. 2002). Need exists (iii) to better understand smallholder farming systems diversity and trajectories (which influence adoption of SI interventions), and feedback between farming systems and the landscapes in which they operate. In addition, (iv) guidelines for knowledge sharing are crucial for stakeholder engagement in making SI recommendations actionable. This requires the use of innovation systems approaches to scale-out best-bet technologies. However, (iv) there is insufficient study of the efficacy and efficiency of innovation platforms and systems in the agrifood systems in which WHEAT operates. More research is thus needed on the dynamics, actors and interactions of locally embedded, sustainable innovations systems. 2.4.6 Clusters of activity FP4 consists of four Clusters of Activity (CoA). While FP 4.1 provides a farming system analytical framework to prioritize constraints and interventions towards the SI of wheat-based farming systems, and FP 4.3 evaluates such targeted interventions, using multiple tools and criteria, FP 4.2 provides the necessary decisions support tools and institutional environment to ensure that validated interventions provide livelihood and landscape benefits derived from SI. FP 4.4 then provides innovative models for scaling products and outcomes from FP 4.2 to considerable farming populations and wheat-based areas. The four CoAs are tightly interlinked by integration of knowledge and feedback loops for methodological improvement (e.g. 4.1 will integrate information on agronomic performance from 4.3 into systems analysis and will, in return, provide targeting and prioritization guidelines for cropping systems scale research in specific agro-ecologies through 4.3). FP 4.1 will interact with FP 1.1 by using meta-level targeting information and will provide feedback for systems analysis information, FP 4.2 will institutional landscape insights to leverage scaling research and interventions under FP 4.4. FP 1.4, which monitors adoption figures and process indicators will receive feedback for methodological improvement and design, feeding back into FP4’s Monitoring Framework for SI. Finally, FP 4.3 will use promising germplasm for targeted environments and cropping systems from FP 3.1 and provide feedback on their performance considering G x E x M analyses (Herrera et al., 2013). FP 4.1 Multi-scale farming systems framework to better integrate and enhance adoption of wheat SI options This CoA will produce a methodologically actionable multi-scale framework for farming systems analysis (1) to understand constraints and prioritize interventions, considering current and future demand, (2) to guide targeting of options (technical and institutional) in specific contexts (agro-ecological, socioeconomic, and institutional) and (3) to understand tradeoffs and synergies between options when combined. The framework will make use of existing large datasets, many generated during Phase I (including geo spatial, remote sensing and climate data), and will combine the use of participatory research (to understand farmers’ constraints and objectives, and identify future scenarios as in FP 4.2), and empirical research (on-station and on-farm trials on component technologies), and modelling tools (to understand111 the performance of current farming systems and explore future scenarios) as articulated in FP 4.3 (Giller et al., 2011). Depending on the constraints and priorities identified in each context, this CoA will consider interventions (1) making more efficient use of inputs (including labor, time, energy, fuel, etc), (2) closing yield gaps, (3) diversifying diets and improving nutrition (e.g., wheat-legume relay cropping, integration of livestock production in wheat production systems), (4) promoting social inclusiveness, with particular emphasis on women and youth (e.g., labor-saving technologies), and (5) improving system’s resilience to climate change and other stresses (e.g., early planting, increased water-use efficiency through CA). Support to improved targeting of interventions will work at two-levels: landscape-level (i.e., recommendation domains) and farm-level (i.e., farm types). At the landscape-level, the robust geospatial framework from the Global Yield Gap Atlas (van Bussel et al., 2015; van Wart et al., 2013) and associated database will be used. At farm-level, participatory and multivariate approaches will be used for categorizing farming communities in functional or structural types (Kebede, 2009; Tittonell et al., 2010), using survey data collected during Phase I. Figure FP 4-2. FP4 CoAs and knowledge/product flows and feedback loops between FPs/CoAs. FP4.1 and 4.3 provide targeting information on and cropping systems opportunities, respectively, and operate at different analytical scales (region, landscape, farm, and field), while integrating research from FP1.1 and 3.1. FP4.2 operates as the central node by which farmer decision-making and instructional incentives can be assessed, providing feedback loops to FP1.4. This results in the identification of scalable research products and technologies that are extended through research results that inform scaling processes in FP4.4.112 The analysis of tradeoffs and synergies will be multi-scale (Baudron et al., 2015a) and multi-criteria (e.g. López-Ridaura et al., 2002), and will make use of a suit of approaches including bio-economic models, systems dynamics, agent-based models, informative scenarios analysis and multi-criteria assessments(Boulanger and Bréchet, 2005; Kelly et al., 2013). Country-level recommendation domains for combinations of wheat SI interventions and for different objectives (increased productivity/efficiency, improved diets/nutrition, social inclusiveness, and improved resilience to climate change and other stresses (South Asia, North, East, and Southern Africa). FP 4.2 Integration of technological and institutional options in rural livelihood systems An enabling institutional context is a necessary condition for agricultural change (Hounkonnou et al., 2012). This CoA aims to understand the incentives and decision-making processes at the farm and institutional landscape scale that drive the integration of SI technologies in diverse rural livelihood systems. FP 4.2 develops and implements participatory methodologies to identify, test and evaluate SI technologies and institutional arrangements – socio-technical options – together with farmers and other stakeholders in targeted geographies. Thus, this CoA will arrive at ‘scalable products’ – SI technologies, decision-support tools and new institutional arrangements – for diverse sets of farmers, agricultural sector stakeholders, and development actors, as well as new methodologies for the integrated assessment of SI approaches when scaling is explicitly considered. FP 4.2’s focus builds on previous research, which revealed that plot-level assessments of SI technologies, while intrinsically important, are not enough to foster agro-technological change. Institutional constraints at different scales (farm-level and beyond) often shape the applicability of SI technologies in different farming and farm-household systems (Andersson and D’Souza, 2014; Schut et al., 2015); they constitute prerequisite conditions for smallholder farmers’ integration of new technologies into their livelihood systems (Giller et al., 2015; Sumberg, 2005). Cognizant of the need to complement participatory on-farm testing of SI technologies with a focus on the wider farm environment, a wider set of agricultural system stakeholders has been included in agricultural research. However, the numerous multi-stakeholder fora – including innovation platforms – that have been set up by AR4D projects at the local level, have often been deployed mainly as a technology dissemination mechanism, with little regard for end-users and their circumstances. Actionable research is therefore needed into the efficacy and efficiency of different multi-stakeholder participation modalities in the identification, experimentation with, and evaluation of socio-technical options (that is, technologies and/or new institutional arrangements). This CoA integrates insights generated by ex-ante adoption and impact studies (FP 1.4), multi-scale farming systems research (FP 4.1) and experimental research into cropping system opportunities (FP 4.3), in multi-stakeholder participatory research on the integration of socio-technical options for sustainable intensification in WHEAT-based farming systems. Such feedback also informs research into Flagships 1 and 3, while generating information demands for farming systems research (FP 4.1). It focuses on the incentives/drivers of such integration, by developing research aimed at: 1. Understanding agricultural system configurations (institutional landscapes) and, particularly, the role of multi-stakeholder interaction mechanisms – notably Innovation Platforms – within these, in generating socio-technical options for sustainable intensification. 2. Understanding the decision-making processes and priority setting of different farmer types (as outlined in FP 4.1) and other agricultural system stakeholders regarding the integration of such socio-technical options, in the context of diverse rural livelihood systems and farming strategies. 3. Understanding the impact of different socio-technical options from a multi-scale perspective, that is, from a farm and (institutional and environmental) landscape perspective.113 Thus, FP4.2 will provide a framework and identify scalable products – combinations of SI technologies, decision-support tools and (complementary) new institutional arrangements – by partner organizations – beyond the CRP’s on-farm research sites, through different scaling modalities as studied and developed in FP4.4. In conjunction with the CRP Roots, Tuber and Bananas (notably RTB FP 5.4), and building on agricultural systems research within phase I WHEAT and MAIZE, and the systems-focused CRP Dryland systems, FP4.2 will develop analytical frameworks, methodologies and tools to address the research foci. FP 4.3 Multi-criteria evaluation and participatory adaptation of cropping systems This CoA provides proof of concepts, know-how, and knowledge of potential wheat cropping systems interventions that reduce yield gaps focused on resource poor farmers in the targeted agro-ecologies. CoA 4.3 benefits from extensive Phase I research, and also from integration of Dryland Systems CRP. An underlying SI hypothesis is that productivity can be increased while reducing environmental externalities and paying dividends to smallholders (Pretty and Bharucha, 2014). Wheat is a key staple food crop that is increasingly subject to stresses under climate change. Research aimed at buffering the millions of smallholder wheat farmers (see table 2, section 1.1) from the anticipated negative effects of climate change on wheat productivity is a critical concern, and will benefit from strong integration with CCAFS. Additional priority research goals include the development of actionable methods to (a) reduce management yield gaps using low cost tools and approaches (offer complementarity with research at BISA platforms in South Asia), (b) limit greenhouse gas emissions in systems where wheat is rotated with rice (offering complementarities with RICE in South Asia) or farmed intensively (Latin America) and (c) raise farm incomes by efficiently utilizing inputs and labor. The scale of the environmental ramifications of wheat systems are apparent, especially in South Asia, where intensively cultivated rice-wheat zones are experiencing rapid and drastic groundwater decline and rapidly increasing pumping costs (linkage to research at BISA platforms). These issues underscore the need to develop water use efficient cropping systems. Farm productivity in Latin America, South Asia, and Africa is limited by the availability of farm power, increasingly high labor costs and scarcity, especially as rural out-migration increases (Mottaleb and Mohanty, 2014 ) and resulting feminization of agriculture in densely populated South Asia, where youth increasingly search options outside of agriculture (Justice and Biggs, 2013). FP 4.3 builds on the extensive knowledge generated in systems agronomy, including integrated soil fertility management (ISFM), conservation and precision agriculture, appropriate mechanization, weed management, soil ecology and G x E x M analysis. Enhance efficiency, resilience, and sustainable functioning: Cropping systems are increasingly subjected to climatic stresses (extreme heat, drought, waterlogging etc., alone or in combination), as well as to socioeconomic problems (availability of labor, inputs, their quality and cost). To avert risk and foster investment in SI, farmers need assurance that cropping systems will consistently produce high, stable and profitable yields under different abreactions. Standardized minimum-datasets that provide indicators and metrics for these variables from long-term trials and networks of participatory research will be developed. Wheat SI research will address the limiting factors and multi-facet system optimization for increased system functionality related to agricultural production, environmental services and livelihoods. The 2017-2021 phase will develop cross-regional minimum-datasets and research pilots to assess both on-farm as well as off-farm consequences of management practices in wheat systems, with emphasis on indicators for assessments of soil and water quality and metrics for energetic and environmental footprint of alternative cropping systems and their contributions to SI goals.114 FP 4.4 Improve enabling environment for scaling up/out (including capacity development) WHEAT Phase I was largely concerned with scaling up of the sustainable intensification technologies and practices through innovation platforms, farmer organizations, public-private partnerships with private sector agro-dealers and traders and partnership with public sector extension. The approach in Phase ll will be to evaluate and learn from the processes of scaling-up introduced over the first phase and to design and develop new models of scaling such as higher level platforms for policy dialogue (e.g. jointly with PIM, other CRPs, linked to Country Coordination action plans), the introduction of ICT methods and the use of mass media and private sector service provider business models. Strategic interventions through FP 4.4 will draw on the multi scale farming system framework of 4.1 and crop management technologies developed under COA4.3, drawing on methodological and decision support to scaling from FP 4.2. This CoA will deliver the following outputs: 1. SME business model development for provision of goods and services: a) developing business models of small and medium scale local enterprises including agro-dealers, traders, mechanization service providers, agro-processors and formulate upgrading strategies to develop the demand for their goods and services; b) supporting multiple stakeholder processes in strengthening seed, post harvest, small scale mechanization and/or other input supply chains; c) developing linkages between private sector stakeholders and with financial service providers. 2. Partnerships and collaboration in support of smallholder intensification: a) (co-)-developing public private partnerships with corporate level seed companies, agro-dealers and mechanization businesses to facilitate the uptake of sustainable intensification based technologies (including forward and backward value chain linkages and interventions); b) developing linkages between farmers, farmer organizations and input and output market actors; c) developing linkages with financial institutions for the provision of value chain finance; f) conducting negotiations and developing agreements with seed companies, agro-chemical companies and major importers and manufacturers of mechanization to import and/or produce and market agricultural machineries; and g) developing partnership agreements with public sector extension services to foster the scaling-up and out of SI based technologies and practices. 3. Developing the capacity to innovate among multiple stakeholders (strongly linked to cross-cutting CoA Capacity Development) 4. Learning for feedback and scaling up and out: The learning aspects of the M&E system is critical for adoption and adaptation to occur. The system will be designed to generate knowledge and facilitate learning. Together with ICARDA and CIMMYT MEL Teams, the BMZ-funded Senior Advisor will be part of a Community of Practice of GIZ scaling-out colleagues in 8 CRPs and will support organizational learning and research about scaling out pathways, models and approaches across WHEAT. 2.4.7 Partnerships Partners and target geographies Phase I of WHEAT allowed the initiation or strengthening of strategic partnerships with advanced research institutions and national agricultural research partners who are expected to carry on WHEAT’s work following the 2021 CRP investment.115 Table FP4-3. FP4 beneficiaries. CoA Products Direct beneficiaries Scaling mechanism Indirect beneficiaries Ultimate beneficiaries and expected impact by 2021 4.1 Multi-scale farming system framework to guide R4D interventions Information, knowledge, and methodologies FP1, FP3.7 Development organizations NARES, and other last mile providers to better target of technical interventions Other CRPs (CCAFS, WHEAT, GRiSP, RTB, DCL, WLE), FP1 Through FP4.4 Feedback loop to FP4 Farmers Small business/ enterprises Farmers in targeted regions Farmers, rural service providers, private sector, in targeted regions, ICT companies, South Asia* SSA Africa** Latin America and Caribbean*** 4.2 Participatory approaches to adapt and integrate technological components - Feedback on in-situ integration of technologies - Improved technical know-how of stakeholders 4.3 Development and field testing of crop management technologies -Improved crop management practices aiming at increasing yields and resources use efficiency (CSA) *Asia: Bangladesh (Barisal, Rajshahi, Rangpur, Khulna Divisions), Nepal (Central and Western Regions), India (Bihar, Haryana, Orissa, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan), Pakistan (Punjab), Iran (Kurdistan, Loristan, Kermanshah, Esat Azerbaijan), Afghanistan (Kabul, Nangarhar), Central Asia (Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan), and China North Africa: Morocco **Sub-Saharan Africa: Ethiopia (Highlands), Kenya (Laikipia), Rwanda (Northern Region), Burundi, Tanzania (Northern Region and Southern Region), Zambia, and Zimbabwe. ***Latin America: Mexico and Ecuador 2.4.8 Sustainable intensification and climate change FP4 with its focus on systems approaches to developing productive, environmentally sound, and socially equitable SI-based best practices provides a natural home for climate smart agriculture (CSA).Working closely with FP1 and CCAFS, the evidence produced by this flagship will be used to model future climate effects on production, together with synergies and trade-offs, to identify target adaptation domains with potential mitigation co-benefits that will inform how CSA is integrated into strategies and plans at the regional, national and local levels. More specifically, FP4 will work closely with CCAFS around : a) participatory evaluation of WHEAT technologies and practices in climate smart villages (CSVs) and other sites where appropriate, b) improved resource use efficiency, particularly nitrogen and water, and their impact on lowering GHG emissions (Sapkota et al., 2015, 2014) , c) evaluation of the C sequestration potential of SI interventions including crop diversification (Dendooven et al., 2014; Powlson et al., 2016, 2014), and d) creation of multi-criteria datasets and standardized methods and metrics to quantify CSA over a range of scales. The GYGA spatial framework, combined with CCAFS Climate ‘Analogue’ tools (Harvey et al., 2012), will provide a means to explicitly evaluate climate smart options in both current and future climates.116 This work will leverage WHEAT and CCAFS climate projections, farm typologies, and farming system models to support the evaluation of technologies in terms of enhanced resilience to climate variability and extremes (drought, floods, and high temperatures), mitigation of GHG emissions and associated costs at the landscape and regional scale, with support from FP 4.1. Building on research determining stress-prone wheat mega-environments, this work will be targeted through CSVs and other CCAFS research. 2.4.9 Gender Research conducted in Phase I highlighted the importance of understanding and influencing the socio agro-ecological landscapes within which wheat based farming systems and sub-systems are embedded (Beuchelt and Badstue 2013; Farnworth et al. 2015; Baudron et al. 2015).The ability of women, youth and marginalized groups to participate effectively in, and benefit from, innovation processes can be hampered by increasing male outmigration as a primary response to climate change and other changes, a relative lack of leveregable productive resources for youth or women at household and community levels and other factors. In Phase II, FP4 will build on learning to date to integrate gender analysis into its agricultural innovation systems approaches. All applied R4D interventions will proactively engage women, men, and youth of both sexes in technology development, evaluation, and validation, and systematically disaggregate their feedback by sex and age. Social characteristics will be integrated as key variables into the development of farmer typologies and related modeling. Important research questions include:  How do gender and age (and other relevant) differences in farmers’ access to and control over productive resources influence technology choices?  What types of institutional arrangements and business models can enhance the ability of poor women farmers, youth and marginalized groups to access and benefit from more efficient and labor saving technologies?  What are potential trade-offs of sustainable intensification technologies from a gender and social inclusion perspective? And what approaches can help mitigate these?  How do social and gender norms constrain/enhance individuals’ ability to engage in agricultural innovation processes? And what are effective measures to address barriers to social inclusion in technology development and dissemination? 2.4.10 Capacity development FP 4 leverages opportunities for scaling and capacity development through linkages to the cross-cutting CoA, to support national partners, mainly through (1) collaborative research and linkages to advanced global research institutions, (2) graduate students funded by WHEAT, (3) specific training courses, and use of ICT/distance learning tools to engage remotely located trainees and (4) sharing of science infrastructures. In line with External Evaluation Recommendations 3 and 5 (link), objectives for FP4 are:  Enhance understanding of the application of SI oriented research methodologies (particularly use of multi-criteria assessments), management practices, technologies and machinery for both irrigated and rainfed wheat production systems.  Strengthen ability to synthesize and apply available knowledge related to research methodologies, management practices, technologies and machinery.117  Increase knowledge of long-term trial planning and management.  Strengthen participants’ ability to generate scientifically-sound hypotheses, determine data collection strategies (including for soil and crop management), interpret data and summarize into scientifically sound conclusions and recommendations.  Foster and heighten appreciation of benefits of team work and interdisciplinary research.  Build skills and capacities necessary to manage innovation and extension networks. 2.4.11 Intellectual asset and open access management See Annexes 3.9 and 3.10. 2.4.12 FP management FP4 management will be constituted of co-leaders from the two leading centers at FP and CoA level (Richard Thomas/ICARDA and Bruno Gerard/CIMMYT for overall FP4 management. In our experience, it is very difficult to get firm commitment and understanding of CRP complexity from non CGIAR partners. The co-lead centers will ensure proper complementarity /synergies between meager W1/2 resources allocated to FP4 and the large W3/bilateral portfolio being mapped under this FP. Guidance for FP science quality and relevance will be provided by a group of scientists recognized in the field for their tremendous expertise and experience (mentoring committee). The committee will be constituted of Ken Cassman (ULN), representatives from select NARS, in whose countries WHEAT has major investments (e.g. South Asia, Africa, LAC, high level representatives from 1 or international NGOs). FP4 management and mentoring committee will meet once year to plan and review. Additional virtual meetings will be organized on a need base. Table FP4-3. FP and CoA leaders. FP4 coordinators and CoA leaders FP/CoA Structure CIMMYT ICARDA FP 4.1 Multi-scale farming systems framework to better integrate and enhance adoption of wheat SI options Frederic Baudron Quang Bao LeLe FP 4.2 Integration of technological and institutional options in rural livelihood systems Jens Andersson Shinan Kassam FP 4.3 Multi-criteria evaluation and participatory adaptation of cropping systems ML Jat Yashpal Singh Saharawat FP 4.4 Improve enabling environment for scaling up/out (including capacity development) David Kahan Vinay Nagia 2.4.13 Budget summary (see separate template)