Research output : Journal Publications › Publication in refereed journal › Academic research › peer-review

Monitoring in-vivo stomatal conductance (g s ) dynamics is essential for predicting crop water usage and yield sensitivity in response to climate change. Leaf and canopy spectroscopy offer a non-destructive method for g s monitoring; however, the underlying mechanisms connecting leaf spectra with stomatal anatomical and behavioral traits, and their subsequent impacts on g s , remain underexplored. In this study, we conducted a wheat field trial, collecting comprehensive measurements of stomatal anatomical (i.e., size, density) and behavioral (i.e., opening ratio, pore area) traits by a customized, high-resolution microscope, leaf spectra via a handheld spectroradiometer, and g s via a handheld AP4 Leaf Porometer across various genotypes, nitrogen treatments, growth stages, and diurnal environments. We observed substantial g s variability, with stomatal anatomical and behavioral traits jointly accounting for 79% of this variability. We further examined the relationship between leaf spectra and stomatal traits/conductance using a partial least square regression (PLSR) model and discovered that a single PLSR spectral model accurately predicted the variability of each of these traits and g s across our datasets. Furthermore, we demonstrated a strong correspondence between spectral variations resulting from g s and spectral alternation induced by stomatal anatomical and behavioral traits. By analyzing the diurnal association between spectral and g s variability, we revealed important biophysical mechanisms underlying relationships among spectra, stomatal anatomical and behavioral traits, and g s . Collectively, our findings highlight the potential of leaf spectroscopy in advancing crop physiology monitoring, contributing to enhanced food security and sustainability.

Research output : Journal Publications › Publication in refereed journal › Academic research › peer-review

T1 - Enhancing wheat crop physiology monitoring through spectroscopic analysis of stomatal conductance dynamics

N2 - Monitoring in-vivo stomatal conductance (g s) dynamics is essential for predicting crop water usage and yield sensitivity in response to climate change. Leaf and canopy spectroscopy offer a non-destructive method for g s monitoring; however, the underlying mechanisms connecting leaf spectra with stomatal anatomical and behavioral traits, and their subsequent impacts on g s, remain underexplored. In this study, we conducted a wheat field trial, collecting comprehensive measurements of stomatal anatomical (i.e., size, density) and behavioral (i.e., opening ratio, pore area) traits by a customized, high-resolution microscope, leaf spectra via a handheld spectroradiometer, and g s via a handheld AP4 Leaf Porometer across various genotypes, nitrogen treatments, growth stages, and diurnal environments. We observed substantial g s variability, with stomatal anatomical and behavioral traits jointly accounting for 79% of this variability. We further examined the relationship between leaf spectra and stomatal traits/conductance using a partial least square regression (PLSR) model and discovered that a single PLSR spectral model accurately predicted the variability of each of these traits and g s across our datasets. Furthermore, we demonstrated a strong correspondence between spectral variations resulting from g s and spectral alternation induced by stomatal anatomical and behavioral traits. By analyzing the diurnal association between spectral and g s variability, we revealed important biophysical mechanisms underlying relationships among spectra, stomatal anatomical and behavioral traits, and g s. Collectively, our findings highlight the potential of leaf spectroscopy in advancing crop physiology monitoring, contributing to enhanced food security and sustainability.

AB - Monitoring in-vivo stomatal conductance (g s) dynamics is essential for predicting crop water usage and yield sensitivity in response to climate change. Leaf and canopy spectroscopy offer a non-destructive method for g s monitoring; however, the underlying mechanisms connecting leaf spectra with stomatal anatomical and behavioral traits, and their subsequent impacts on g s, remain underexplored. In this study, we conducted a wheat field trial, collecting comprehensive measurements of stomatal anatomical (i.e., size, density) and behavioral (i.e., opening ratio, pore area) traits by a customized, high-resolution microscope, leaf spectra via a handheld spectroradiometer, and g s via a handheld AP4 Leaf Porometer across various genotypes, nitrogen treatments, growth stages, and diurnal environments. We observed substantial g s variability, with stomatal anatomical and behavioral traits jointly accounting for 79% of this variability. We further examined the relationship between leaf spectra and stomatal traits/conductance using a partial least square regression (PLSR) model and discovered that a single PLSR spectral model accurately predicted the variability of each of these traits and g s across our datasets. Furthermore, we demonstrated a strong correspondence between spectral variations resulting from g s and spectral alternation induced by stomatal anatomical and behavioral traits. By analyzing the diurnal association between spectral and g s variability, we revealed important biophysical mechanisms underlying relationships among spectra, stomatal anatomical and behavioral traits, and g s. Collectively, our findings highlight the potential of leaf spectroscopy in advancing crop physiology monitoring, contributing to enhanced food security and sustainability.

KW - Stomatal anatomical/behavioral traits

UR - https://www.scopus.com/pages/publications/85199414149