Test Weight and Your Next Wheat Crop: A Fact Sheet Will low test weight wheat be suitable for use this fall? While test weights of 56 pounds per bushel are most desirable, lighter test weights may be an acceptable alternative when heavier seed of desirable varieties is not available. The effect of test weight on emergence, vigor, and yield potential will vary from year to year. When there is stress on the seedlings or young plants in the fall from freeze or drought or some other factor, the effect of higher test weight seed is often greatest. The charts below show the results of two tests done at K-State’s Agronomy North Farm in 1950 by H.H. Laude, professor of agronomy, with seed provided by Frank Bieberly, Extension agronomist. Wheat Seed Quality: Pawnee variety Heavy seed Light seed Test weight 59.5 44.1 Germination 91% 95% Viable seeds/lb 15,800 31,900 Pounds planted/acre 83.5 92.2 Viable seeds/acre 1,320,000 2,940,000 Emergence (% of viable seeds) 60.8% 28.4% Days to emergence 21 27 Heads/plant 3.01 2.68 Size of heads (grams) 0.499 0.479 Test weight of final crop (lbs/bu) 60.8 60.8 Yield of final crop (bu/acre) 44.3 39.3 Wheat Seed Quality: Wichita variety Heavy seed Light seed Test weight 62.4 53.1 Germination 92% 86% Viable seeds/lb 12,000 19,200 Pounds planted/acre 88.2 77.2 Viable seeds/acre 1,060,000 1,480,000 Emergence (% of viable seeds) 68.0% 48.4% Days to emergence 21 25 Heads/plant 2.91 2.78 Size of heads (grams) 0.658 0.618 Test weight of final crop (lbs/bu) 61.9 62.0 Yield of final crop (bu/acre) 50 45Several conclusions can be drawn from this study: • Test weight had no effect on germination. • Higher test weight seed had 20-40% improved field emergence. • Higher test weight seed emerged 4-6 days sooner. • Higher test weight seed resulted in about a 5-bushel yield increase. • Test weight of the seed had no effect on the final test weight of the subsequent crop. Generally, each three pounds per bushel in test weight signifies one to two bushels per acre in yield. Yields and vigor are likely to be affected at test weights below 54-56 pounds per bushel. Below that level, the plants are likely to have more problems in the fall and in surviving the winter. How can I manage the risk of low-test-weight seed most effectively? Here are a few things to keep in mind about low-test-weight seed: • Producers planting low-test-weight seed should be cautious not to plant the seed too deeply, since seedling vigor will be below average. • Certified seed with a sub-standard test weight still meets the KCIA standard for germination. Using certified seed of a variety adapted to the planting area is the best quality decision that can be made this year. • Plant varieties that you are able to manage. o If you live in an area that is affected by soilborne mosaic disease, then planting a variety without resistance to this disease will greatly increase your risk. o Unless you are planning to graze out, plant on or after the Hessian fly free date. o Some research suggests that it is good practice to apply a low rate of fungicide in the early spring to control powdery mildew, then to follow with a full rate at the flag leaf stage to control foliar diseases. If you plant a variety with limited resistance to leaf rust or stripe rust, be prepared to monitor your fields to manage these diseases. Where can I find more useful information? All of these links are available on the KCIA web site at www.kscrop.org/links.aspx K-State Research and Extension http://www.oznet.ksu.edu Kansas Crop Performance Tests http://kscroptests.agron.ksu.edu/ KSU Department of Plant Pathology Extension (includes Wheat Variety Disease and Insect Ratings) http://www.plantpath.k-state.edu/DesktopDefault.aspx?tabid=49 KSU Department of Agronomy Extension (includes weekly Agronomy eUpdates)

Producers who are planting wheat seed with a test weight below 55 pounds per bushel this season will want to take certain steps to help increase the chances of getting a good stand. Low-test-weight seed usually germinates well, but seedlings tend to have lower vigor than seedlings from seed with higher test weights. Therefore, producers should take special care to try to get a good, healthy stand. Drill speed. Using a drill speed of 5 mph will help ensure that the seed is placed down in the seed slot, and that the seed slice is closed and firmed properly, making for good seed-soil contact. Getting good seed-soil contact will help the seedlings develop a good primary and secondary root system. Also, when drill speeds are too fast, the openers tend to “ride up” at times, resulting in a planting depth that is shallower than intended. Seeding depth. All wheat should be planted at the proper depth for best stands. But it is especially important that low-test-weight seed is not planted too deeply, since this seed has low emergence vigor to begin with. It is equally important not to plant too shallowly. Shallow-planted wheat often has more difficulty establishing a good root system in the fall than wheat planted at the proper depth, and this can be an even greater problem when using low-test-weight seed. Plant low-test-weight seed 1 to 1.5 inches deep. Seeding rates. The lower the test weight, the more seeds there are per pound. Producers who use a planting rate based on the number of pounds per acre should not adjust their seeding rate when planting low-test-weight seed. They will end up planting more seeds per acre, but emergence is often somewhat lower with low-test-weight seed, so the stand should come out about normal. Seed treatments. Fungicide seed treatments are advisable if seed is infected with a disease such as loose smut, common bunt, scab, or black point; if seeding dates are unusually early or late; and in no-till situations. It may also be a good idea to use a fungicide seed treatment on low-test-weight seed even if it doesn’t meet one of those criteria, simply to protect the seed against seed-borne diseases, seed rots, and seedling blights that may reduce vigor. Producers should make every effort to have their seed cleaned as thoroughly as possible to remove scabby kernels and shriveled seed. This will help increase the test weight and improve emergence and seedling vigor. -- Jim Shroyer, Extension Agronomy State Leader jshroyer@ksu.edu -- Erick DeWolf, Extension Plant Pathologist dewolf1@ksu.edu