20-173 extension.sdstate.edu | © 2019, South Dakota Board of Regents Too much water and high salt concentrations are harmful for crops. This chapter will address the management of high water tables and the basic reclamation principles for saline seeps. Lowering high water tables with subsurface drainage Subsurface (tile) drainage is used to remove excess soil water using drainage pipes or tiles installed below the soil surface (Fig. 20.1). Since the 1970s, perforated polyethylene tubing has become the most popular material for drainage pipes. Historically, however, cylindrical clay or concrete sections, or “tiles,” were used, so the customary terms “tiling” and “tile drainage” are still used to describe subsurface drainage. Drains are typically installed just below the root zone at depths of 2.5 to 4 ft. The outlet for tile lines is generally streams or open ditches. Subsurface drainage is used to enable more timely planting, harvesting, and other field operations and to increase crop yields. Many South Dakota soils have poor natural drainage, and without artificial drainage they would remain waterlogged from excess precipitation for extended periods. Figure 20.1. Water flowing from the outlet of a subsurface drain. (Photo by Lynn Betts, USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service) Chris Hay ToddTrooien (Todd.Trooien@sdstate.edu) Chapter 20: Managing High Water Tables and Saline Seeps in Wheat Production BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES Wheat iGrow20-174 extension.sdstate.edu | © 2019, South Dakota Board of Regents Approximately 25% of the farmable acres in the U.S. have some form of artificial drainage. By removing excess water from the root zone (Fig. 20.2), salts are flushed from the root zone, and the risk of soil compaction from field operations is reduced. Since soils with subsurface drainage will dry out and warm up faster in the spring than undrained soils, subsurface drainage can enhance the ability to implement no till and minimum tillage. Along with improved yields, subsurface drainage tends to reduce surface runoff and peak flows by encouraging increased infiltration of water into the soil. Zucker and Brown (1998) reported that subsurface drainage reduces surface runoff by 29 to 65%, peak flows are reduced by 15 to 30%, and total outflows (surface runoff plus subsurface drainage) are similar. Other studies have shown modest increases (5 to 10%) in total outflows from the addition of subsurface drainage. The impacts of subsurface drainage on water quality can be both positive and negative. Because subsurface drainage reduces surface runoff, sediment and nutrient losses from surface runoff are also reduced. Sediment loss reductions range from 16 to 65%, and losses of phosphorous may be reduced up to 45% (Zucker and Brown 1998). However, subsurface drainage can increase nitrate transport. Nitrate losses from subsurface drainage vary widely, but concentrations of nitrate in drainage water frequently exceed the drinking water standard. Conservation drainage constitutes a set of established and new designs and practices designed to maintain the benefits of drainage, while reducing negative environmental impacts. This is an active area of research, and a number of conservation drainage demonstration projects are being implemented in the Midwest. These practices include: 1. Controlled drainage to reduce nitrate loss from fields. 2. Woodchip bioreactors to remove nitrates from drainage water. 3. Constructed wetlands. 4. Shallow drainage. 5. Two-stage ditches. South Dakota drainage law delegates regulatory authority of drainage to the county level. So, an important first step in planning any drainage project is to consult with the county drainage board (in many counties, the board of county commissioners is also the drainage board). Other states have different governing authorities for regulating drainage activities. In addition to county regulations, the Swampbuster provisions introduced in the 1985 Food Security Act (Farm Bill) discourage the drainage of wetlands for agricultural use. Therefore, local USDA Farm Service Agency and Natural Resources Conservation Service offices must be consulted about drainage plans. Draining wetlands can result in the unintended loss of farm program benefits. Figure 20.2. Subsurface drainage removes excess water from the root zone via pipes or “tile” buried beneath the soil surface. (Illustration courtesy of Gary Sands, University of Minnesota)20-175 extension.sdstate.edu | © 2019, South Dakota Board of Regents When preparing a drainage plan, it is useful to gather background information from county soil surveys, topographic maps, aerial photos, climate data, local water management authorities, and drainage guides from neighboring states (e.g., Minnesota and Iowa). Obtaining more detailed data (topographic surveys and soils characterizations) for areas to be drained is also a good idea. Economics A primary goal of subsurface drainage is increased profit for the producer. Because installing a subsurface drainage system involves a significant investment, an economic feasibility study should be conducted. Factors that should be considered are expected yield response, impact on equipment and material costs, and costs of the drainage system over the life of the drainage system. Although the actual lifetime of a well designed drainage system may be 50 to 100 years, the economic lifetime of the drainage system is often assumed to be 20 to 30 years. Estimating values to use in the economic analysis, particularly yield response, is difficult. Comparisons of combine yield monitor data from poorly drained and adequately drained areas of a field may give some indications of potential yield response when drainage improvements are made. Other potential sources of information include neighboring producers who have installed drainage systems and drainage contractors. As an example of yield increases following drainage, data based on 20 years of yield records from Ontario showed yield increases of 17 bushels per acre (38% increase) for winter wheat and 11 bushels per acre (33% increase) for spring wheat (Irwin 1998). Additional information is available in Hofstrand (2010) and online calculators. Prinsco at http://www.prinsco.com/article.cfm?ID=96 Advanced Drainage Systems at http://www.ads-pipe.com/en/documentlistingasp?documenttypeID=40 Drainage outlet Subsurface drainage systems will only perform as well as the outlet, so good drainage design should begin by ensuring there is a suitable outlet. Where drains outlet into a natural or manmade open channel, depth and capacity are important considerations. The channel should be deep enough so that the bottom of the drain outlet is at least 1 ft above the normal low-water level in the waterway when the drains are installed at the desired depth. Proper maintenance is needed to prevent drainage ditches from becoming clogged by sediment and/or by vegetation growth. Consequently, erosion and weed control are essential to ensure that these systems continue to function effectively. Any existing drainage outlet should be checked to see if it can handle additional water, and if it is deep enough to allow the planned additional field drains to be placed at the desired depth. Pumped outlets may be considered where there is an otherwise adequate outlet that is not deep enough to allow for gravity drainage. The outlet should be protected from rodents or other small animals, washout, and erosion. In addition to the physical requirements for an outlet described above, the outlet must also meet all legal and regulatory requirements for drainage outlets. In general, the drainage should occur through a natural or established watercourse and should not substantially alter the flow such that it causes unreasonable harm downstream. In many cases, downstream notification or approval may be required as part of the regulatory process. Regardless, drainage problems are often not limited to a single property, so working with neighbors to address drainage problems can result in more effective solutions and less potential for disputes. Surface intakes Surface intakes can be used to remove ponded water from closed depressions or potholes through the subsurface drainage system. If surface intakes are added to a subsurface drainage system, the system should be sized to accommodate the concentrated flow entering from the surface. Surface intakes can be a source of weakness in the drainage system, so offsetting them on a short lateral will help protect the main.20-176 extension.sdstate.edu | © 2019, South Dakota Board of Regents By providing a direct connection to water at the surface, these intakes can serve as a shortcut for sediment, nutrients, or other pollutants to travel to downstream surface water bodies. Open intakes that are flush with the surface, in particular, should be avoided for this reason. Slotted or perforated risers allow for some settling of sediments before water enters the intake. A permanent grass buffer should be provided around the riser to trap sediment and other pollutants before they reach the intake. Rock or “blind” inlets are another option that eliminates the need for a riser by filtering out sediment before it enters the drain. Drainage coefficient The drainage system should be designed to remove excess water from the active root zone to prevent crop damage within 24 to 48 hours of excess precipitation. The rate at which the drainage system can remove water from the soil is commonly called the drainage coefficient, and it is a measure of the system capacity. The drainage coefficient is typically expressed as the depth of water removed in a 24-hour period (inch/ day). Because drain spacing and sizing will be determined by the drainage coefficient, the choice of a drainage coefficient is an economic as well as an agronomic decision. If surface inlets will be used to directly drain water from the surface through the drain pipes, a larger drainage coefficient should be used to account for the additional water coming from the surface. Typical drainage coefficients for humid regions are shown in Table 20.1. Choice of an appropriate drainage coefficient should be made based on local conditions, experience, and judgment. Because South Dakota is in a transition zone from humid to semiarid regions, a smaller drainage coefficient of ¼ inch per day may sometimes be an appropriate choice. Drain depth and spacing The depth and spacing of parallel drains necessary to achieve a certain drainage coefficient are determined in large part by the hydraulic conductivity (permeability) of the soil and the depth to a low permeability barrier. For single targeted drains, the hydraulic conductivity and depth to the barrier will determine the effective distance from the drain that will be adequately drained given the depth of the drain. Depth and spacing should be considered simultaneously when trying to achieve a desired drainage coefficient. As shown in Figure 20.2, the water table will be highest midway between two parallel drains and lowest at the drains themselves. The depth and spacing are chosen to maintain a minimum depth to the water table midway between the drains. The height that the water table will reach above the drains will be less for drains spaced more closely together. Therefore, deeper drains can be spaced further apart, whereas shallower drains need to be closer together to achieve the same drainage coefficient. Table 20.2 lists general drain depth and spacing recommendations based on soil type. More specific depth and spacing recommendations should be based on measured soil properties or drainage experience with similar soils and conditions. Table 20.1. Typical drainage coefficients for humid areas. (ASAE EP480 standard) Soil Types No Surface Inlets (in./day) Blind Surface Inlets (in./day) Open Surface Inlets (in./day) Mineral Soils Field crops ⅜ – ½ ½ – ¾ ½ – 1 High value crops ½ – ¾ ¾ – 1 1 – 1 ½ Organic Soils Field crops ½ – ¾ ¾ – 1 1 – 1 ½ High value crops ¾ – 1 ½ 1 ½ – 2 2 – 420-177 extension.sdstate.edu | © 2019, South Dakota Board of Regents Drains are typically placed 3 to 4 ft deep. If possible, drains should be placed above shallow, low permeability layers. The minimum depths to avoid damage from heavy equipment are 2 ft for laterals (3 to 6 in. diameter pipes) and 2.5 ft for mains (8 in. or greater diameter pipes). Ideally drainage systems would have uniform depth, but field topography and layout decisions will determine actual drain depths. System layout The layout of the drainage system, along with the design decisions made above, will determine the uniformity of drainage for the field or area. Drainage system layout is chosen to best match field topography and outlet location. Topography will dictate what layout options are practical. There are several layout options available for drainage systems (Figure 20.3). Parallel drainage systems are used to drain large areas or entire fields of regular shape and uniform soils. Herringbone systems are typically used in relatively narrow depressions such as those along shallow drainageways. Double main systems are used where a larger or deeper drainageway divides the field. Targeted drainage systems are used where there are isolated wet areas that require drainage. Mains are run through natural low areas toward the outlet, and laterals may be added to provide drainage for larger wet areas. For any layout pattern, a general guideline to follow when laying out the system is to align laterals along the field contours to the extent possible. This allows the laterals to act as interceptors of water as it moves down the slope. Collectors or mains are then placed on steeper grades or in swales to allow for a more uniform lateral gradeline. Table 20.2. Typical drain spacing and depths for parallel drains for various soils. (Wright and Sands, 2001) Soil Type Permeability Drain Spacing (ft) Fair Drainage (¼ in./day) Good Drainage (⅜ in./day) Excellent Drainage (½ in./day) Drain Depth (ft) Clay loam Very low 70 50 35 3.0–3.5 Silty clay loam Low 95 65 45 3.3–3.8 Silt loam Moderately low 130 90 60 3.5–4.0 Loam Moderate 200 140 95 3.8–4.3 Sandy loam Moderately high 300 210 150 4.0–4.5 Figure 20.3. Typical drainage system layout options for lowering a water table.20-178 extension.sdstate.edu | © 2019, South Dakota Board of Regents Drain grades and envelopes Drainage systems should be designed such that both minimum and maximum grade recommendations are followed. This is to ensure that flow velocities are within an acceptable range. The grade should be sufficient to prevent sediments from accumulating in the drains and shallow enough to prevent excessive pressure that could result in erosion of soil around the drain. Drains in stable soils (clay content greater than 25 to 30%) can be placed on shallower grades. Soils lower in clay with more fine sands and silt require steeper grades. Table 20.3 lists the minimum recommended grades for various pipe sizes depending on whether fine sands and silts are likely to be a problem. In addition to minimum grades, the use of drain envelopes should be considered for soils high in fine sands and silts, particularly if shallower grades must be used. Materials used for drain envelopes include gravel, synthetic fiber membranes, and pre-wrapped geotextiles (or “socks”). To prevent problems with excessive pressures and velocities, mains should not be placed on grades greater than 2% where practical. When steeper grades must be used, additional precautions should be taken, which may include the use of pressure relief wells. Large changes in grade, particularly steep-to-flat, should be avoided to prevent the risk of blowouts. Reversals in grade must always be avoided. Drain pipe sizing The recommended size of drainage pipe depends on the area to be drained, the chosen drainage coefficient, the grade on which the pipe is laid, and the pipe materials (corrugated plastic or smooth-wall, plastic or concrete, pipe). To determine the required flow that the pipe must handle, the following equation can be used: Where Q is the required flow rate (capacity) in cubic feet per second (cfs), the area to be drained is in acres, and the drainage coefficient (DC) is in inches per day. For example, the flow capacity needed to drain 40 acres with a 3/8 in. drainage coefficient is: 40 acres x 0.375 in./day ÷ 23.8 = 0.63 cfs. To size the outlet, the total area to be drained by that outlet should be used. For sizing individual laterals, only the area drained by the lateral is used. If future expansion of the drainage system is likely, the outlet should be sized to accommodate that expansion. Once the required flow is calculated, the pipe size (diameter) necessary to carry that flow can be determined based on the grade and the pipe material. Figure 20.4 can be used to determine necessary pipe size for corrugated plastic pipe. Other sources for determining necessary pipe size include: Q(cfs) = Area (acres) x DC (inches/day) 23.8 Table 20.3. Minimum recommended grades (% or ft/100 ft) for drainage pipes where CPE is corrugated polyethylene plastic pipe and smooth refers to smooth wall plastic pipe or concrete or clay tile. (ASAE EP480 standard) Inside diameter of drain (in.) Drains not subjected to fine sand or silt (min. velocity of 0.5 ft/s) Drains subjected to fine sand or silt (min. velocity of 1.4 ft/s) CPE Smooth CPE Smooth

extension.sdstate.edu | © 2019, South Dakota Board of Regents • Manufacturer’s literature. • Slide calculators from drain pipe manufacturers (e.g., Prinsco, Hancor, and ADS). • Web-based calculators.

• Drainage contractors and engineers. Installation considerations In addition to a good design, the quality of installation is also important in determining how well a drainage system will perform. Once a drainage system is installed, correcting any problems is difficult and expensive. It is, therefore, important to make sure that drainage installation is done on grade and is of high quality. An experienced and reliable contractor can be an asset in achieving a quality installation. The equipment used for installation can also influence the quality of installation. Tractor mounted and pull type plows can perform well, but good grade control can be more difficult to manage. Shallow or flat grades, in particular, have a smaller margin for error, so accurate grade control is especially important under those conditions. As-built plans showing the dimensions and locations of all drains should be prepared following or during (such as those created by GPS systems) installation and kept as part of the farm records. These plans will facilitate any future expansion or required maintenance of the drainage system. Problems to watch for following installation include wet spots in the field where drains were installed, sedimentation at the outlet, blockages of the outlet, and erosion damage around the outlet. Saline seeps Another problem caused by excess water is the saline seep. A saline seep is the discharge location for shallow groundwater. The water also carries any soluble salts or nutrients that it encountered in the soil. Over time, the seep area becomes too wet and too saline, either reducing crop performance or preventing crop growth. Additional information on the management of saline soils is available in Chapter 19. Saline seeps start when water from rain or snowmelt enters the soil in a recharge area. This recharge area is often located some distance from the seep and must be higher in the landscape (Figure 20.5). If the water Figure 20.4. Chart for determining the required size of corrugated plastic pipe based on the pipe grade (in percent) and the design discharge (in cubic feet per second). The solid black lines represent the discharge of a pipe of the size indicated that is flowing full, based on the drain grade. The space between the solid black lines represents the range of pipe capacity for the pipe size indicated between the solid lines. For drain grade and discharge combinations that do not fall directly on one of the solid lines, the next larger commercial pipe size would be chosen. For example, the required drain size for a drain grade of 0.07% and a design discharge of 0.15 cfs would be an 8-inch pipe (dashed black lines). (Adapted from ASAE EP480 standard)20-180 extension.sdstate.edu | © 2019, South Dakota Board of Regents is not used by a crop in the recharge area, it eventually drains downward and leaves the root zone. If the water draining downward reaches a layer of high lateral permeability, then the water can move laterally in that layer. If the topography is such that the zone of high lateral permeability intersects or approaches the soil surface, the water will re-emerge on the soil surface as a saline seep. As the water moves through the soil, it dissolves salts and soluble nutrients. If and when the water reappears on the soil surface, those salts and nutrients arrive with the water and are deposited on the soil surface. Magnesium and sodium salts are often found in seep areas. Seep areas with high sodium salts must be managed carefully (Chapter 19). Saline seeps can also have high nitrate-nitrogen concentrations. The excess water in the seep causes can prevent access by equipment and reduce the plant root functioning. The salts interfere with water uptake and reduce or even prevent plant growth. Sodium salts can cause problems with the soil itself, reducing infiltration rates. Nitrate-nitrogen is a vital crop nutrient and can be used by growing plants. High nitrate concentrations in these areas generally are not a concern unless it gains entry to a drinking water supply and causes nitrate-nitrogen concentrations in excess of the maximum contaminant level of 10 mg/L (ppm). Control of a saline seep starts in the recharge area. The precipitation that falls on the recharge area must be prevented from leaving the root zone. That is, the crop (vegetation) water use must be increased in the recharge area so water is used up before it can drain out the bottom of the root zone. Crop water use can be increased by increasing the cropping intensity. Some strategies for increasing the cropping intensity include annual cropping instead of fallow. Another strategy is planting alfalfa in the recharge area. This is a good option because alfalfa has a high water use each growing season, and alfalfa has deep roots, using water and nutrients deeper in the soil profile, when compared to small grain crops. Planting alfalfa may not be required for the entire recharge area. In the central Great Plains, planting one-third of the recharge area to alfalfa has been shown to reduce water movement to a seep by one-half or more. Any crop rotation that decreases the amount of time the recharge area is fallow will help reduce or eliminate the active mechanism supporting a saline seep. When the increased cropping intensity in the recharge area has effectively controlled the water, the seep area will respond in one or two years, depending on the weather. More rainfall will cause greater leaching in the seep, reducing the time until the area is fit again for crop production. Figure 20.5. A diagram showing saline seep hydrology. Water moves from the recharge area, through the zone of lateral permeability, and back to the soil surface in the discharge area (which is the seep). As it moves through the soil, the water dissolves and carries soluble salts and nutrients (Mankin and Koelliker, 2000). Reprinted with permission of the American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers, St. Joseph, MI.20-181 extension.sdstate.edu | © 2019, South Dakota Board of Regents When the water is effectively controlled in the recharge area, some management practices in the seep area can hasten reclamation. Straw mulch has been shown to be effective at increasing the rate of salt removal from the seep area. Other practices that conserve soil water in the seep area will increase the rate of salt removal by increasing the water drainage and leaching. Interceptor drains have been tried in reclaiming saline seeps. However, the intercepted saline water poses a disposal problem. In addition, the interceptor drainage strategies have been shown to be less than successful at reducing water and salt flow to the seep. Irrigation has been used to impose downward water movement in the seep itself, moving water and salts downward and out of the root zone. This can be effective in moving salts out of the root zone, especially if accompanied by artificial drainage within the seep area. However, the drain water disposal issue is still a problem, and resalinization can occur during the non-growing (and non-irrigating) season. In summary, saline seeps are caused by excess water coming from a location higher in the landscape. Reduction or reclamation of the saline seep starts with intensified cropping in the recharge area.20-182 extension.sdstate.edu | © 2019, South Dakota Board of Regents Additional information and references

efficient water-use to control saline seeps in the northern Great Plains, USA. Agric. Water Manage. 4:295-31.

ecosystems: A review. Crit. Rev. Env. Sci. Tec. 39(11):909-1001.

Available at http://www.extension.umn.edu/distribution/cropsystems/DC7740.html Dinnes, D. L., D. L. Karlen, D. B. Jaynes, T. C. Kaspar, J. L. Hatfield, T. S. Colvin, and C. A. Cambardella. 2002. Nitrogen management strategies to reduce nitrate leaching in tile drained Midwestern soils.

Doering, E J. and F M Sandoval. 1976. Hydrology of saline seeps in the Northern Great Plains. Trans.

Frankenberger, J., E. Kladivko, G. Sands, D. Jaynes, N. Fausey, M. Helmers, R. Cooke, J. Strock, K. Nelson, and L. Brown. 2006. Drainage water management for the Midwest: Questions and answers about drainage water management for the Midwest. Purdue Extension Publication WQ-44. Available at

Franzen, D. 2007, Managing saline soils in North Dakota. SF-1087 (revised). North Dakota State University Extension. North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND. Available at http://www.ag.ndsu.edu/ pubs/plantsci/soilfert/sf1087-1.htm Halvorson, A D. 1984. Saline-seep reclamation in the Northern Great Plains. Trans. ASAE 27(30):773-778.

www.extension.iastate.edu/store/ItemDetail.aspx?ProductID=6064&SeriesCode=&CategoryID=&Key word=SR%2013

Available at http://www.extension.iastate.edu/agdm/wholefarm/html/c2-90.html Irwin, R. W. 1999. 20 year record of drainage benefit. Factsheet No. 9. Land Improvement Contractors of Ontario. Available at http://www.drainage.org/factsheets/fs9.htm Mankin, K R and J K Koelliker. 2000. A hydrologic balance approach to saline seep remediation design. App. Eng. Agric. 16(2):129-133.

drainage contractor. 541.000-1. British Columbia Ministry of Agriculture and Food. Available at

intensity on nitrate load in a cold climate. Trans. ASABE 51(3):937-946.

University of Minnesota Extension. Available at http://www.extension.umn.edu/distribution/ cropsystems/DC7685.html20-183 extension.sdstate.edu | © 2019, South Dakota Board of Regents

drainage studies in the Midwest. Bulletin 871-98. Ohio State University Extension. Available at http:// ohioline.osu.edu/b871/index.html

Thanks to Gary Sands, University of Minnesota, for providing illustrations and helpful comments.

D.E., C.G. Carlson, and K. Dalsted (eds). iGrow Wheat: Best Management Practices for Wheat Production. South Dakota State University, SDSU Extension, Brookings, SD.20-184 extension.sdstate.edu | © 2019, South Dakota Board of Regents In accordance with Federal civil rights law and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) civil rights regulations and policies, the USDA, its Agencies, offices, and employees, and institutions participating in or administering USDA programs are prohibited from discriminating based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, gender identity (including gender expression), sexual orientation, disability, age, marital status, family/parental status, income derived from a public assistance program, political beliefs, or reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity, in any program or activity conducted or funded by USDA (not all bases apply to all programs). Remedies and complaint filing deadlines vary by program or incident. Persons with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, American Sign

Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339. Additionally, program information may be made available in languages other than English.

ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html and at any USDA office or write a letter addressed to USDA and provide in the letter all of the information requested in the form. To request a copy of the complaint form, call (866) 632-9992. Submit your completed form or letter to USDA by: (1) mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights 1400 Independence Avenue, SW Washington, D.C. 20250-9410;

University, the South Dakota Board of Regents and the United States Department of Agriculture.