Int J Environ Sci Nat Res 21(1): IJESNR.MS.ID.556054 (2019) 0030 Introduction Waterisafiniteresourceusedindifferentsectorslikeagricul ture, domestic and industry. The competition for both quality and quantity of water is alarmingly increasing from time to time [1]. Therapidexponentialincrementofpopulationgrowthworldwide in general and in developing countries is forcing the environment to produce more food and cash crop to feed and enhance eco nomic development of the people. The main reason for increasing pressure on water resources are human activity like population growth, urbanization, increased living standards, growing com petition for water, and pollution. These are aggravated by climate change and variations in natural conditions. However, the envi ronmental resources like land and water are limited and even decreasing due to over exploitation, pollution and climate change [2]. Water is vital for crop production which its shortage has an in fluence on crop yields. Therefore, farmers have a tendency to over-irrigate than irrigating with some tolerable stress without due consideration for scarce water resources. These problems needoptimizationofwaterallocationbasedonwateruseefficien cy(WUE)andenhancementofwaterproductivityisessentialsim ilar to the aim of increasing crop yield. In arid and semi-arid areas where moisture stress is the main challenge for crop production, the spatial and temporal variations exacerbate the problem. Different physical and biological mea sures are adopted to conserve moisture in the farm level. More over, design of irrigation schemes does not address the situation of moisture availability for crop and the competition between dif ferentsectorsforthesereasondeterminationsoftherightamount of crop water requirement and crop coefficient is needed. Abstract Estimating right amount of crop water requirement is the need for designing, establishing and managing irrigation projects, and scheduling irrigation. The objective of this study was to estimate the seasonal water demand and crop coefficient of wheat for effective irrigation water planning and management. Field experiment was carried out at Melkassa Agricultural Research Center, Ethiopia during wet growing season under lysimeter. Two non-weighing type lysimeters with the dimension of 1m × 2m area and 1m depth were used to determine the daily ETc of wheat crop. Crop coefficient (Kc) was determined for each growth stages as the ratio of ETc to ETo. The ETc was determined by soil water balance equation and ETo was computed by CROPWAT version 8.0 using the FAO Penman-Monteith equation. The seasonal ETc was found to be 52.2mm, 97.1mm, 191.5mm and 73.2mm of water calculated for initial, crop development, mid-season, and late-season stages, respectively. The measuredcropcoefficient(Kc)valueswere0.54,1.15and0.67fortheinitial,midandlatestages,respectively.SomeoftheKcvaluesfoundinthis experiment differed slightly from the average of FAO estimation. This indicates that there is a need to develop Kc values for given local climate conditions and cultivars. The maximum plant height and spike length obtained were 86.6 and 8.2cm, respectively. The maximum obtained grain yield and the above- ground biomass yield were 4559.1 and 10897.1kg/ha, respectively. Also, the maximum number of tillers per square meter of 559.0 and number of grains per spike of 42.0 were obtained. Keywords: Crop coefficient; Crop water requirement; Lysimeter; Wheat Determination of Wheat (Triticum Aestivum L) Seasonal Water Demand and Crop Coefficient for Effective Irrigation Water Planning and Management in Semi-Arid, Central Rift Valley of Ethiopia Research Article Volume 21 Issue 1 - August 2019

Int J Environ Sci Nat Res Copyright © All rights are reserved by Ketema Tezera Ketema Tezera*, Gobena Dirirsa and Tilahun Hordofa Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research (EIAR), Melkassa Agricultural Research Centre, Ethiopia Submission: July 30, 2019; Published: August 19, 2019 *Corresponding author: Ketema Tezera, Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research (EIAR), Melkassa Agricultural Research Centre, EthiopiaHow to cite this article: Ketema Tezera, Gobena Dirirsa, Tilahun Hordofa.. Determination of Wheat (Triticum Aestivum L) Seasonal Water Demand and Crop Coefficient for Effective Irrigation Water Planning and Management in Semi-Arid, Central Rift Valley of Ethiopia. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2019; 21(1):

031 International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) is one of the important grain crops produced worldwide with larger area of cultivation than any other crop covering 217 million hectares with average yield of 3.00t/ha. Wheat is the largest deficit item in the developing country food basket. Between 1970 and 2010, more than half of the increment in wheat consumption was met by increased wheat imports, and several countries became totally dependent on im ports for wheat [3]. Wheat is one of the major cereal food crops grown highly in Ethiopia, which ranks the country in second place from sub-Saha ran Africa in terms of the total wheat area and production. Among cereals, wheat is the fourth most important crop in area coverage following teff, maize and sorghum holding 13.25% out of the total graincropscultivationareainthecountry.Moreover,inamountof production volume, next to maize, teff and sorghum, wheat is the higher production volume from cereals production in the country with total production of 3,434,706 tons, which accounts around 14.85% from the total grain production during 2012/2013 pro duction season [4]. The yield and production of wheat in Ethiopia also is increasing [5]. It is commonly grown in the highlands at al titudes ranging from 1500 to 3000masl. Major wheat production areas in the country are Arsi, Bale, Shewa, Ilubabor, Western Har erghe, Sidama, Tigray, Northern Gonder, and Gojam regions [6]. In Ethiopia due to improvements in seed supply, greater fer tilizer applications and increase in extension support, wheat production is slightly increasing. However, only during 2012/13

dia, USA and Italy. Moreover, during 2013/14 marketing year, the Ethiopia Grain Trade Enterprise (EGTE), the government owned enterprisethatcontrolsallcommercialwheatimports,plannedto import 400,000 metric tons of wheat [7]. For these reason, expan sion of irrigated wheat production area needed especially in arid and semiarid. Ethiopian wheat production for 2019/20 will reach a projected 4.6 million metric tons. This increase is in part due to a new governmental initiative to make the country wheat self-suf ficient through supplying required inputs, development of irriga tion schemes, promoting mechanization and extension support in semi-arid areas of the country. The wheat production estimate for 2018/19 reached 4.5 million metric tons, which is like the official USDAestimate.Thisismainlyduetogoodweatherconditions,im proved input supply, few pests and lower disease pressure. Most of the farmers in wheat growing belts started using mechanized farming systems, especially during harvest. In the past the coun try has usually imported 30 to 35 percent of the domestic wheat demand with no significant volumes of grain exports due to offi cial export restriction on grains. Therefore, determination of the crop water requirement and crop coefficient of wheat is important to utilize the limited water resources for agricultural water management, design of scheme and planning of different crop production with available water. The purpose of this study is to explore the amount of wheat sea sonal water demand and crop coefficient in the rift valley area. Materials and Methods General description of the study area The study was conducted at Melkassa Agricultural Research Center, Central Rift Valley of Ethiopia. It is geographically located between latitude of 80 24’ to 80 26’ N, longitude of 390 19’ to 390 19’ E and the mean altitude of the area is 1550m.a.s.l. The climate of the area is characterized as semi-arid with uni-modal low and erratic rainfall pattern with annual average of 824.9 mm. About 67.4% of the total rainfall of the area occurs from June to Septem ber. The mean maximum temperature varies from 26.3 to 31.0 0 C whilethemeanminimumtemperaturevariesfrom10.4to16.40 C. Experimental setup Two non-weighing lysimeters were located 100m away from the Meteorological Station of the Melkassa Agricultural Research Center was used for the study. The lysimeters used was rectangu lar in shape with 1m x 2m dimension. Its effective soil depth was 100cm with additional 100cm layers, 20cm rock, 20cm gravel and 20cm sand pack beneath which excess water from the upper soil was collected and discharged into the drainage collector placed in the working chamber through a drainage pipe. The lysimeters havechambersforaerationanddrainagepipesconnectedtoawa ter collecting tank and were placed in the working area beneath the lysimeter. The heights of the lysimeter rims were maintained nearthegroundleveltominimizetheboundarylayereffectinand around it. However, the rims of lysimeters protruded 20cm above thesoilsurfacesothatnosurfacerunoffwaterenteredthelysime ters.Oneaccesstubeforeachlysimeterwasinstalledatthecenter down to 100cm depth. Test crop wheat Kekeba, a bread wheat variety is a semi-dwarf, early maturing and widely cultivated in various parts of the country. It can grow in wide agro-ecology, ranging from altitude of 1500 to 2200masl. It was released by KARC of EIAR in 2010 and it is among the few wheat varieties grown in lowland area, as it is drought tolerant [8]. The seed of wheat Kekeba variety was sown by drilling manu allyinrowafterlandispreparedwellandpreirrigated,withseed ing rate of 125kg/ha at mid-June of the three consecutive years (2016, 2017 and 2018) in and out of the lysimeters in all di rections to have identical and uniform environment as in normal fields and decrease adverse effects. Plots size of 1m x 2m with ridges spaced at 60cm. Seed was sown in double row on both side of the ridge with spacing of 20cm. The plots were fertilized with rateof100kg/haforbothDAPandUREAbutUREAwasappliedin split. The crop was harvested at the end of October. Measurement of soil moisture and irrigation application Soil samples were collected at interval of 15cm up to 100cm depth for determination of some soil physical properties like field capacity, permanent wilting point, bulk density and texture. Par-How to cite this article: Ketema Tezera, Gobena Dirirsa, Tilahun Hordofa.. Determination of Wheat (Triticum Aestivum L) Seasonal Water Demand and Crop Coefficient for Effective Irrigation Water Planning and Management in Semi-Arid, Central Rift Valley of Ethiopia. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2019; 21(1):

032 International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources ticle size distribution was determined using the Bouyoucos hy drometer method. The water content at FC and PWP were deter mined by the pressure plate apparatus technique, whereas total available water (TAW) was obtained by subtracting PWP from FC. Bulk density was determined by taking undisturbed soil sample from the site using the core method [9]. The average FC and PWP ofthesoildepthprofilewere31.8%and15.3%,respectively.Thus, TAW at wheat root depth was 111.9mm. The obtained bulk den sity was 1.13g/cm3 . Neutron probe was used to monitor the soil moisture content. The probe was calibrated following standard procedure for neutron probe calibration by plotting the results of neutron probe reading and gravimetric sampling around the access tube. The moisture content was monitored at intervals of 15cm up to 60m soil depth of wheat root depth at different times during the growing season. Irrigation water was applied to the crop when there was 55% depletion of the available soil moisture within the crop root zone [10]. Similar irrigation amount at this depletion level was given to the crop in and outside the lysimeter to ensure uniform plant growth. The application of irrigation was carriedoutinknownvolumeofwatercansbyconvertingthe55% depletion in terms of volume. Irrigation was terminated at crop maturity. Determination of wheat water requirement and crop coefficient Crop water requirement (ETc) and crop coefficient (Kc) for wheat was accurately determined using the lysimeters. Drainage (non-weighing) type lysimeters were installed near to meteoro logical station in the center. They were constructed of reinforced concrete and the inside was lined with a plastic sheet to avoid leakage or lateral inflow and outflow of water. The actual wheat ETc was determined using the water balance from lysimeters for the growth stage of the crop. The ETo was calculated using the daily weather data of the study area using CROPWATT version 8.0. However, the alternative procedure is to determine ETo from climatic data using the FAO Penman-monteith method once the necessary variables specific to the location are determined. In this study, daily ETo was calculated using FAO Penman-Monteith Equation [11] based on the actual daily climatic data collected at MARC, Agro-meteorological Service Department. The CROPWAT model calculates ETo based on the formula of FAO Penman-Mon teith using equation 1. 2 2 900 0.408 ( ) ( ) 273

(1 0.34 ) n s a R G u e e T ETo u γ γ   ∆ − + −   +   = ∆+ + Where: ETo -reference evapotranspiration (mm/day), Rn -net radiation at the crop surface (MJ/m2 /day), G - soil heat flux densi ty (MJ/m2 /day), T -mean daily air temperature at 2m height (0 C), u2 -wind speed at 2m height (m/s), es -saturation vapour pressure (kPa), ea -actual vapour pressure (kPa), es - ea -saturation vapour pressure deficit (kPa), ∆ -slope vapour pressure curve (kPa/0 C) and γ -psychrometric constant (kPa/0 C). Thecropevapotranspirationforeachgrowthstageofthecrop was calculated by using water balance equation 2 ( ) 2 ETc I R D S = + − +∆ ………………… Where ETc: crop evapotranspiration (mm), I: irrigation (mm), R: rain fall (mm), D: drainage collected (mm), and ∆S: change in storage of soil moisture (mm). The crop co efficient value over a given period, such as physiological growth stage or whole season, was then calculated using equation 3 ( ) / 3 Kc ETc ETo = …………………………… Where Kc: crop coefficient; ETc: crop evapotranspiration, and ETo: reference crop evapotranspiration. Results and Discussion Water is necessary for proper crop nourishment, when this water is not naturally available; irrigation makes it possible to compensate for water deficits. Even when the amount of rainfall is sufficient, its spatial and temporal distribution may not be as required. Both under watering and as well as over-watering leads to soil problems of root and turf diseases, nutritional deficiencies and reduced plant yields. To ensure success of the wheat produc tion and the irrigation system monitoring, managing and main taining the study was conducted. Crop evapotranspiration (ETc) The detailed crop water requirement (ETc) of wheat from wa ter balance components obtained from lysimeter, values are pre sentedinTable1.Cropevapotranspiration(ETc)ofwheatshowed an increasing from the 20 day after sowing (DAS) to the 45 DAS and started to decline from 80 DAS to 100 DAS period (Figure 1). This implies that there was lesser and similar ET of the crop at the initial stage. In the development stage, there was an increase in ETc. During mid-season stage the ETc was almost constant as compared to the other stages. Finally, at the late-season stage the crop ET showed a decreasing trend, which resulted from leaf senescence and to the completion of grain formation and filling thereby limiting transpiration (Figure 1). The result in line with Allen et al. [11], that reported the crop water use declined in the late season stage, which was due to the cessation of leaf growth. Table 1: Stage-wise average ETc, ETo, estimated and FAO Kc values of wheat kekeba variety. Parameters Growth stage Initial Stage Development Stage Mid-Season Late Season Growing length, day 20 25 35 20

Eto, mm/day 4.83 4.51 4.76 5.46How to cite this article: Ketema Tezera, Gobena Dirirsa, Tilahun Hordofa.. Determination of Wheat (Triticum Aestivum L) Seasonal Water Demand and Crop Coefficient for Effective Irrigation Water Planning and Management in Semi-Arid, Central Rift Valley of Ethiopia. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2019; 21(1):

033 International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources Estimated Kc 0.54 - 1.15 0.67

The maximum water use was 191.5mm at the mid-season stage followed by development stage was 97.1mm. The minimum water use obtained from initial stage of 52.2mm. Late-season of 73.2mm hold the third in water use (Table 1). The ETc for the whole growth period of wheat varied from a minimum value of 390.8mm to a maximum of 427.3mm. The overall average was 413.7mm. Similarly, Charles [12] obtained that 427mm for wheat incentralArizona,buttheresultissignificantlydifferentfromval ue obtained by FOA, which is reported as 550mm ETc. Naturally, crops need sufficient moisture for different physio logical activities like metabolism of food. Over-watering severely limits (or even cuts off) the supply of oxygen that roots depends on to function properly, meaning that plants do not get adequate oxygen to survive. Furthermore, too much water can also lead to root rotting and the irreversible decay of roots. Though under watering leads to moisture stress in which the amount of wa ter applied is not sufficient for potential grain yield production since food synthesis is reduced. Different crops display a variety of physiological and biochemical responses to existing drought stress making complex phenomenon like reduced CO2 assimila tion mainly by stomata closure, membrane damage and disturbed activity of various enzymes, especially those of CO2 fixation and adenosine triphosphate synthesis [13]. Due to absence of actual data on wheat seasonal water re quirement in the study area; FAO result was frequently used as representatives in the design and planning of irrigation systems. This leads to erroneous application of water use. Efficient use of waterforirrigatedagricultureisfundamentalforagriculturalpro duction in arid and semi-arid areas that improves crop water pro ductivity. In general, as water is scarce and becomes a critical re source for agriculture, supplying the right amount is essential for healthy plants and optimum productivity [14] and also important for effective irrigation water planning and management. Reference evapotranspiration The meteorological data temperature, relative humidity, sunshine and wind speed were recorded from weather stations during growing seasons and using FAO Penman-Monteith equa tion 1, the reference evapotranspiration values calculated during the growing seasons of wheat for studied area and is shown in Figure 1. The result of ETo during initial stage was higher than ETc and lower at mid stage, this implies that the ground cover of leaf shadow has a role in reducing the amount of water that evap orates from a bare soil. Similarly,Allenetal.[11]hasalsoindicatedthatatinitialstage nearly 100% of ET comes from evaporation, while crop full cover at the mid-season stage more than 90% of ET comes from tran spiration. Seasonal crop coefficient (Kc) for wheat After determining ETo and ETc, Kc can be calculated using the appropriate crop coefficient formula by equation (3). The results of three-year data show that there was a high variation in Kc val ues among growth stages. The Kc values changed from one stage to the other stage rapidly with the changes in crop development (Table2).TheKcvaluerangedfrom0.54attheinitialgrowthstage to 1.15 at the mid-season stage (Table 1). The curve presented in Figure 2 represents the changes in the Kc values over the length ofthegrowingseasonofwheat.Theshapeofthecurverepresents the changes in the vegetation and ground cover during plant de velopment and maturation that affect the ratio of ETc to ETo. The Kc value increased from the initial to the development stages while it reached its highest and relatively remained con stant at the mid-season stage (Figure 2). The Kc declined rapidly during the late season stage. A higher Kc value was recorded from 45-80 days after planting as compared to the values at the begin Figure 1: Water balance during the experiment.How to cite this article: Ketema Tezera, Gobena Dirirsa, Tilahun Hordofa.. Determination of Wheat (Triticum Aestivum L) Seasonal Water Demand and Crop Coefficient for Effective Irrigation Water Planning and Management in Semi-Arid, Central Rift Valley of Ethiopia. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2019; 21(1):

034 International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources ningandendofthecroplifecycle.TheoverallaverageKcofwheat values for the initial, mid-season and late season growth stages were 0.54, 1.15 and 0.67 respectively. The initial value of Kc start ed to increase after 10% cover of the ground, reached a maximum during the mid-season stage and thereafter gradually declined. Thiscouldbeexplainedbyfoliagesenescencethatrestrictedtran spiration and caused a reduction in the crop coefficient. Table 2: yearly CWR and Kc of wheat kekeba variety. Trial Years Growth stage CWR and Kc Initial Stage Development Stage Mid-Season Late Season Year I (2016)

Kc 0.54 - 1.16 0.68 Figure 2: Estimated and FAO crop coefficient value for different growth stage of wheat. Crop coefficient was collected from FAO Irrigation and Drain age Paper 56 [15] for wheat (spring wheat). The crop coefficient valuesforrespectivegrowthstagesare0.3,1.15and0.4forinitial, midandend,respectively.Thisresultisdifferentfromtheestimat ed Kc values of study area. Determining ETc and Kc of agricultural crops for at the location helps to have wise management of irri gation water, designing and managing irrigated projects and also helps researchers to appropriate irrigation scheduling, by using meteorological data ETo and local crop Kc value of the area. As indicated in table different agronomic and yield data were observedfromthestudy.Themaximumplantandspikelengthob tained were 86.6 and 8.2cm, respectively. The maximum obtained grain yield and above ground biomass yield from the study were 4559.1 and 10897.1kg/ha, respectively. Also, the maximum num ber of tillers per square meter of 559.0 and number of grains per spike of 42.0 were obtained. Therefore, it could be concluded that supplyingtherightamountofcropwaterrequirementisessential for healthy plants and potential production of wheat. Conclusion The ETc and Kc of wheat kekeba variety was evaluated for each growth stage under climatic condition of Melkassa and ar eas which have similar climatic conditions and soil characteris tics.Thefindingshowedthatestimatesofcropwaterrequirement made with locally determined crop coefficients differ from esti mates of FAO publications and others. This emphasizes a strong needforlocalcalibrationofKcforeachcropvariety.Theresultsof ETc and Kc reflected on crop variety, climate, location, and grow ing seasons. The Kc values obtained at the study site (Melkassa) could be applicable to areas with similar soil type, climate, grow ing seasons, and other agro-ecological conditions. Acknowledgement The author is grateful to Ethiopian Institute of Agricultur al Research, Natural Resource Research National Irrigation and DrainageResearchProject,forprovidingfundsfortheexperiment and technical support. He does thankful to Ato Gebeyehu Ashemi,How to cite this article: Ketema Tezera, Gobena Dirirsa, Tilahun Hordofa.. Determination of Wheat (Triticum Aestivum L) Seasonal Water Demand and Crop Coefficient for Effective Irrigation Water Planning and Management in Semi-Arid, Central Rift Valley of Ethiopia. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2019; 21(1):

035 International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources Abere Tesfaye and Tatek Wondimu for their technical support in the field of experimentation. He highly acknowledges all staff members of Melkassa Agricultural Research Center Natural Re source Research Process team for their kind cooperation during field experimentation and data collection.