Propositions 1. Prevention, amelioration and alleviation measures are equally needed and effective in addressing soil compaction. (this thesis) 2. Soil bulk density is an important variable at deriving N2O emission factors for nitrogen fertilization sources. (this thesis) 3. The stoichiometry of carbon : nitrogen : phosphorus in substance flows is essential for building a more circular bioeconomy. 4. Small-holder farmers will remain important for rural livelihoods, but are marginalized in ways that serve no one. 5. Self-persuasion requires critical thinking. 6. Stable emotions make the world better. Propositions belonging to the PhD thesis, entitled Exploring relationships between soil compaction, amelioration and functioning Peipei Yang Wageningen, 1 November 2022Exploring relationships between soil compaction, amelioration and functioning Peipei Yang2 Thesis Committee Promotors Prof. Dr O. Oenema Special Professor Nutrient Management and Soil Fertility Wageningen Universiteit & Research Prof. Dr C. Hu Director Center for Agricultural Resources Research, IGDB, CAS Other members Prof. Dr C.J. Ritsema (Wageningen University and Research) Dr A. Alaoui (University of Bern) Prof. Dr L.J. Munkholm (University of Aarhus) Dr C.G. Kocks (Aeres University of applied Sciences, Dronten) This research was conducted under the auspices of the C.T. de Wit Graduate School for Production Ecology & Resource Conservation.Exploring relationships between soil compaction, amelioration and functioning Peipei Yang Thesis submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of doctor at Wageningen University, by the authority of the Rector Magnificus, Prof. Dr A.P.J. Mol, in the presence of the Thesis Committee appointed by the Academic Board to be defended in public on Tuesday 1 November 2022 at 11:00 in the Omnia Auditorium.4Peipei Yang Exploring relationships between soil compaction, amelioration and functioning 157 pages PhD thesis, Wageningen University, Wageningen, NL (2022) With references, with summary in English

LAST PAGE INSIDE OF THESIS, NOT PART OF TITLE PAGE

Logos are not allowed, except the FSC logo if the thesis is printed on FSC-certified paper. Acknowledgments of the cover designer and printing company are optional. The research described in this thesis was financially supported by Chinese Scholarship Council and by the EU project SoilCare, EU grant agreement 677407. Financial support from Wageningen University, the G. Schieter Foundation and Biomoney for printing this thesis is gratefully

Chapter 1 General introduction 1 Chapter 2 Soil compaction prevention, amelioration and alleviation measures are effective in mechanized and smallholder agriculture: a meta‐analysis 13 Chapter 2 Within‐field spatial variations in subsoil bulk density related to crop yield and potential CO2 and N2O emissions 37 Chapter 4 Responses of cereal yields and soil carbon sequestration to four long‐term tillage practices in the North China Plain 69 Chapter 5 A bore‐hole method for remediating compacted subsoils increased maize yield ‐ prototype field tests 89 Chapter 6 General discussion 111 Summary 147

About the author 153 PE & RC Training and Education Statement 15781 1 General introduction 1.1 Soil quality, functions and threats Soil is an important natural resource; it performs vital functions for our society, economy and the environment (Blum, 2005). How well the soil is functioning is indicated by ‘soil quality’, as expressed by the definition of soil quality, i.e., ‘the capacity of a soil to function within natural or managed ecosystem boundaries, to sustain plant and animal productivity, maintain or enhance water and air quality, and support human health and habitation’ (Greiner et al., 2017; Karlen et al., 1997). In total 7 main soil functions have been distinguished, including (1) biomass production, in agriculture, forestry and natural ecosystems, (2) storing, filtering and transforming nutrients, substances and water in soil, (3) hosting and facilitating soil biodiversity (habitats, species and genes), (4) providing a physical and cultural environment for humans and human activities, (5) providing raw materials (e.g., minerals, carbonates, sand, clay), (6) acting as carbon pool for climate changeregulation,and(7)providinganarchiveofgeologicalandarchaeologicalheritage(EC, 2006). Soil quality is largely determined by soil properties and soil or land management (Bouma, 2014). The conceptual relationships between soil properties, soil functions and ecosystem services are summarised in Table 1.1. Evidently, ecosystem services provided by the soil depend on soil functioning which depend on soil properties and land management. Soils perform the aforementioned functions simultaneously, but at different capacities, depending on soil properties, climate, environmental conditions, and land use and management(Schulteetal.,2014;Schulteetal.,2019).Thecomplexity ofsoilfunctionsand their interaction with human activities and ecosystem services have been studied for decades (Council, 2009), during which time the evaluation of soil quality has experienced large changes, in terms of objectives, tools and methods, and overall approaches (Bünemann et al., 2018). Since about the 2000s, soil biological quality, multi‐functionality and ecosystem services have received much greater attention. Further, digital tools (digital mapping and big‐data approaches), high‐throughput analysis methods, and biological and biochemical indicators have been adopted increasingly (Barrios, 2007; Bünemann et al., 2018). Soilsinmanyareasoftheworldarevulnerabletodegradationasaresultofhumanactivities and climate change. The so‐called soil threats deteriorate soil properties and thereby soil2 functions, including theservices thatsoils provide(TenBerge etal.,2017). Somesoil threats occur naturally, but most of these are caused by human activities, i.e., through soil use and soil (mis)management. A total of about9 soil threats havebeen distinguished, depending in part on the categorization, namely soil erosion (by wind and water), soil organic matter decline and soil fertility decline, soil compaction, soil sealing, soil contamination, soil salinization, desertification, flooding & landslides, decline in soil biodiversity, soil acidification and alkalinization, (Pennock et al., 2015; Stolte et al., 2016; Tóth and Li, 2013). Table 1.1 A conceptual diagram linking soil properties to soil functions and ecosystem services (Adhikari, 2016). The soil threats may lead to soil degradation, which is not always easily recognizable. It has been suggested that the existing scientific knowledge on soil degradation is not sufficiently linked to land management measures and is not sufficiently implemented by end users (Bouma, 2010). Soil degradation is a global and growing concern. To better understand the cause‐effect relationships of soil threats, a so‐called DPSIR framework has been developed (EEA, 2000). This framework shows the relationships between (changes in) Driving forces in societyonPressures onthesoil ecosystem, which affecttheState ofthe soil ecosystem,and thereby Impact the functioning of the soil ecosystem, which then invoke Responses of Ecosystem services Soil functions Soil properties Biomass production Providing food, feed and fibre; Regulating carbon sequestration; Contributing to traditions, spiritual inspiration; Supporting through primary production Soil organic carbon; Sand, silt, clay & coarse fragments; Soil nutrients; Soil pH; Depth to bed rock; Bulk density; Available water capacity; Cation exchange capacity; Electrical conductivity; Soil porosity & air permeability; Hydraulic conductivity & infiltration; Soil biota; Soil structure & aggregation; Soil temperature; Soil mineralogy; Subsoil pans. Storing, filtering & transforming nutrients & water Regulating water & nutrient availability; Purification of water; Supporting ecosystem functions through water and nutrient cycling Hosting biodiversity Supporting biodiversity; Regulating crop pollination, pest, & disease control; Providing pharmaceuticals; Platform for human activities Supporting a human habitat Source of raw material Providing minerals & soil constituents Carbon pool Sequestering carbon; Regulating atmospheric CO2; Storing geological & archaeological heritage Cultural heritage values (natural science, history, anthropology); Supporting geological heritage,3 managers and policy (Tóth and Li, 2013). The DPSIR framework (Fig. 1.1) is valuable in describing the relationships between causes and consequences of ecosystem problems (Kristensen, 2004). 1.2 Soil compaction as soil threat Soilcompactionisdefinedas‘Thedensificationofsoilbywhichtotalandair‐filledporosities are reduced, causing deterioration of soil functions’ (van den Akker, 2008). It is partly a hidden process that impairs a range of soil functions and ecosystem services (Hamza and Anderson, 2005; Nawaz et al., 2013). It has been recognised as a serious environmental problem (McGarry, 2003). Fig. 1.1 The driving forces – pressures – state ‐ impact – responses (DPSIR) framework applied to soil degradation (Kristensen, 2004). The notion of soil compaction is known for centuries. The earliest literature links human‐ induced soil compaction to ploughing; research on the impacts of tillage on soil compaction started from the late 1800s (Unger and Kaspar, 1994). After World War II, more "modern" approaches on soil compaction and its alleviation were conducted (e.g., (Lutz, 1952; Veihmeyer and Hendrickson, 1948). From the 1950s, systematic research on the process of4 soil compaction and on the amelioration of compacted (sub)soils have been conducted in especially US (Mathers et al., 1966; Taylor, 1958), Canada (Barnes, 1971), Netherland (Van Ouwerkerk, 1968), Scotland (Soane, 1976), Norway (Njøs, 1976), Sweden (Eriksson, 1975), Poland (Domzal, 1977), China (Cheng‐zhai and Wei‐sheng, 1979), South Africa (Cleasby, 1964), and Australia (Arndt, 1966). Emphasis was given on defining uniform terms for soil compaction and on measurement methods for compacted soil. Also, a general theory for predicting soil compaction under wheels was formulated (Soane et al., 1980). In1980,theinternationalworkinggroupon‘soilcompaction byvehicleswithhighaxleload’ was established in Uppsala, Sweden. During one of its first meetings, the working formulated recommendations for maximum axle loads; i.e., an axle load of 10 t was recommended as limit (Håkansson et al., 1987). The working group discussed also results of experiments on soil compaction and designed series of new field experiments. The establishment of the working group is a milestone in soil compaction research. In 1998, it was estimated that soil compaction had affected more than 68 million ha of agricultural land in the world, of which more than half of the area was situated in Europe (Flowers and Lal, 1998). An update of the situation in Europe in 2008 indicated that about 36 million ha of land was severely affected by soil compaction, and another 25 million ha was lightly compacted (Houšková and Montanarella, 2008). Estimations based on probability sampling suggested that about 43% of the agricultural land in Netherland had over‐compacted sub‐soils (Brus and van den Akker, 2018b). However, the uncertainties in these estimates is large, also because of the use of different approaches, methods and indicators for assessing soil compaction. 1.3. Causes of soil compaction Soil compaction may be caused by natural processes and by human activities. A diversity of natural processes may lead to soil compaction (Daniells, 2012). Thus, soil compaction may happen during peri‐glacial conditions, following illuviation of soil colloids in subsoil layers, through cracking and swelling processes in heavy clay soils (combined with topsoil tumbling down to the subsoil when cracks are open), through salinization and sodification, and through heavy rains and/or trampling animals. Dry‐wet cycles may also lead to compaction, due to soil structural damages, e.g., changes of pore size distribution (micro‐structure damage)andcrackscausedby theirreversibleshrinkageofpores(macro‐structuredamage) (Xue et al., 2014). Hardsetting soil is common in tropical countries, i.e., the soil loses part of its mechanical strength at dry conditions (Fabiola et al., 2003). Repeated freeze‐thaw cycles may also lead to soil compaction through soil structure breaking down and aggregate5 stability reduction (Asare et al., 1999). Soils may also have a compacted subsoil because of an abrupt textural or mineralogical change with depth, due to a different geo‐genetic origin (Batey, 2009). However, the mechanization of modern agriculture and inappropriate soil cultivation and management are now seen as main causes of soil compaction. The ground contact pressure generated by field machines is the direct reason of soil compaction (Hamza and Anderson, 2005). The risk of subsoil compaction exists whenever a moist or weak soil is loaded by a moderate to high ground contact pressure on a large contact area, i.e. with a high wheel load (Alakukku et al., 2003). A vertical stress of 50kPa at 50cm depth has been suggested as acriticalthresholdofsoilcompactionwhenasoilisatfieldcapacity(Schjønningetal.,2012). Basedonthiscriterion,ithasbeeninferredthatsubsoilcompactionbyhighaxlewheelloads may reach depth of 75 cm (Keller et al., 2019b). Compacted soil layers below a depth of about40cmaredifficulttoameliorateandarethereforeassumedtobevirtuallypermanent (Håkansson and Reeder, 1994). There are many additional factors that affect the risk of soil compaction by agricultural machines, next to the axle wheel loads. For example, the speed of the machines (Horn and Taubner, 1989), the direction of the machines (Weisskopf et al., 2000), the pace between two wheels (Håkansson and Reeder, 1994), and the number of passes (Brais and Camire, 1998) may all influence the extent of soil compaction. There is a common understanding that the more passes of the traffic, the more pressure the soil receives (Marra et al., 2018). However, a recent meta‐analysis study indicated that the degree of soil compaction had no significantlinearorlogarithmicrelationshipwiththenumberofmachinepasses(Ampoorter et al., 2012). This suggest that other interacting factors likely played important roles. Soil properties, including texture, soil organic matter content, soil moisture condition, soil bulk density and soil aggregate stability also influence the risk of soil compaction. Coarse‐

soils (Horn et al., 1995a; Shah et al., 2017a). Soil moisture condition is critical factor in the process of soil compaction; the higher the soil moisture content, the lower the soil support capacityis,andthegreatertheriskofsoilcompaction(MedvedevandCybulko,1995).Stable soil aggregates protect the soil against soil compaction (Pagliai et al., 1995). A special case of soil compaction is by animal trampling in grassland fields. The negative effects of animal trampling shows up in a loss of grass production, pasture quality and in decreases of soil hydraulic conductivity (Mitchell and Berry, 2001). Animals compact soil at rather shallow depth, between 0 and 10 cm in a loamy sand soil (Mulholland and Fullen,6 1991), up to 20 cm in clay soil (Hargreaves et al., 2019). The severity of trampling induced soil compaction depends on trampling intensity, soil type (texture), soil moisture content, grass cover, and slope (Hamza and Anderson, 2005). Evidently, when the soil surface is covered with vegetation, the impact of trampling is much less (Greene et al., 1994). 1.4 Indicators for soil compaction Most commonly used indicators for soil compaction are soil bulk density, soil strength, soil penetration resistance, water infiltration rate, and saturated hydraulic conductivity (Batey, 2009; Hamza and Anderson, 2005; Lipiec et al., 2003; Nawaz et al., 2013). However, these indicatorsarealsocriticisedforvariousreasons;themethodsforestimatingtheseindicators arelaborious,notsensitive,andindirect(proxyestimate).Huberetal.(2008)suggestedfour common criteria to which indicators for the identification of soil compaction should apply: a) acceptability (scientifically sound); b) practicability or measurability; c) policy relevance and easy utility; d) geographic coverage (universally applicable). They also proposed three indicators for assessing soil compaction, i.e., bulk density, air‐filled pore volume, and the vulnerabilitytocompaction.However,theindicatorstheyproposeddonotcomplyfullywith their own criteria, as the ‘vulnerability to compaction’ is difficult to quantify. Vulnerability is interpreted as ‘a likelihood that compaction will occur’, which implies that soil moisture condition, topsoil condition, and axle loads have to be considered (Jones et al., 2003). Lebert et al. (2007) proposed pre‐compression stress and loading ratio as indicators for assessing theriskofsoilcompaction.Theseindicatorsneedsoiltypespecific calibration.For assessing the impairment of subsoil structure, they proposed three additional indicators, i.e., air capacity (>5% air filled porosity at a water suction of pF 1.8), saturated water conductivity (>10 cm day−1 ), and a visual classification of the soil morphology (combination of a ‘spade diagnosis’ and measurements of the effective bulk density and packing density). These are all laborious measurements. Further, these authors recommended not to use soil bulkdensity,becauseofthelackofcriticalthresholdvaluesandanappropriateclassification. Yet, bulk density and soil porosity are direct indicators, because these links directly with the definition of soil compaction, i.e., ‘the densification and distortion of soil by which total and air‐filled porosity are reduced’, and reflect the mechanism/process of soil compaction. Bulk density is the most frequently used parameter for soil compaction and can be measured rather easily (Panayiotopoulos et al., 1994).The limitation of bulkdensity measurement lies in its dependence on soil texture, soil mineralogy, and soil organic matter content. Also, soil bulk density is not a very sensitive indicator for soil compaction, and measurements are7 imprecise in swelling‐ shrinking soils (Hakansson and Lipiec, 2000). Packing capacity is considered to be a more rigorous indicator, because it corrects for differences in soil texture (Jones et al., 2008). In situations where the soil clay content is known, packing density (PD) can be readily calculated from: PD= Db +0.009*C where Db isthebulkdensityint m−3 ,PDthepackingdensityint m−3 , C theclaycontentin%. Three classes of PD have been proposed: low (<1.40), medium (1.40 to 1.75) and high (>1.75 t m−3 ), with class ‘high’ meaning ‘highly compacted soil’. Further, the ‘relative soil bulk density’, or the ‘degree of compactness’ has been proposed as indicator for compacted soil. The relative soil bulk density was defined as the actual dry bulk density in percent of a reference dry bulk density of the same soil. The reference dry bulk density is obtained by a standardized, long‐term, uni‐axial compression test at a stress of 200 kPa (Hakansson and Lipiec, 2000). Evidently, the measurements of the state of soil compaction are labour‐intensive, and thus costly, especially when considering spatial within‐field variations (Lipiec and Usowicz, 2018). Soil penetration resistance is also widely used in studies and especially also in practice, because of its convenience (Stelluti et al., 1998). It reflects the ‘state’ of the soil, and in that sense is a direct indicator of soil compaction. The limitation of soil penetration resistance as indicator for soil compaction lies in its strong dependence on soil moisture condition (Moraes et al., 2014). Thus measurements of soil penetration resistance have to be carried out at standardized soil moisture content. This is not always the case, and explains why a large variability in penetration resistance values are often found. Water infiltration rate and saturated hydraulic conductivity are impact indicators, because they reflect the impact of a possible densification of the soil on water infiltration and water transport in soil. These indicators reflect in part how soil compaction have changed soil functioning. These indicators are useful because of their high sensitivity to soil compaction; a small change in soil compaction may have a very strong effect on water infiltration rate and saturated hydraulic conductivity. Cropyieldisalsoanimpactindicator,becauseitreflectstheconsequenceofsoilcompaction for the harvested yield and thus the revenues for the farmer. The impact of soil compaction on crop yield is the result of several possible underlying causes, including distorted root growth in compacted soil, reduced water and nutrient uptake, water logging and oxygen deficiency in the root zone (e.g., (De Weerd and Klandermans, 1999; Taylor and Brar, 1991;8 Unger and Kaspar, 1994)). However, many studies related to soil compaction merely focus on changes in soil properties, and not so much on crop yield (Nawaz et al., 2013), although it has been shown that impacts on crop yield may provide the economic incentives of preventive measures, including controlled traffic (Chamen et al., 2015). It cannot be excludedthatthelackofadequateinformationontherelationshipbetweensoilcompaction and crop yield in practice, is one of the reasons why farmers have relatively low awareness of the risks and impacts of soil compaction. 1.5 Measures addressing soil compaction Measures aimed at ameliorating compacted subsoils and/or alleviating the impacts of compacted subsoils have been explored almost as long as the problem has been realized (Passioura and Leeper, 1963). Hence, many studies have examined the effectiveness of measures to ameliorate compacted subsoils and/or to alleviate the effects of compacted subsoils,includingdeeptillage,subsoiling,reducedtillage,croprotation,reducedtrafficking and soil amendments. Measures addressing soil compaction may be categorized in three groups, i.e., prevention measures, amelioration measures and alleviation measures. A common opinion is that ‘the best way to manage soil compaction is to prevent it from happening’. Therefore, avoiding, preventing, and precautionary strategies are preferred above amelioration and alleviation strategies, also because of the complexities and imperfections of the latter (Lebert et al., 2007; Schjønning et al., 2015). Prevention measures require a ‘conservative attitude against change of the existing structure’ (Alakukku et al., 2003). They aim at minimizing the traffic in fields and thereby minimize the risk of soil compaction. The effects of prevention measuresaredifficulttocertifyunlesscomparedwithreferencetreatments,i.e.,treatments which do not take prevention measures, or treatments where the soil is compacted on purpose. Evidently, preventive measures are most useful and effective in situations where the soil is vulnerable to soil compaction but not yet (seriously) affected by soil compaction. However, large areas in the world have already compacted soils, either through natural processes, or by human activities (Soane and Van Ouwerkerk, 1995), and thus will need amelioration and/or alleviation strategies. Remediation measures aim at reversing the states of compaction problem, by breaking up compacted soil, by deep ploughing and subsoiling. However, deep ploughing result in reversing soil horizons and burying topsoil fertility in the subsoil (Schneider et al., 2017). Moreover, the open soil condition left by subsoiling is vulnerable to re‐compaction by subsequent machine traffic (Spoor, 1994).9 Remediation measures should only be considered when compacted subsoils have already been formed (also because of the costs involved), and have to be carried out carefully. Alleviation measures aim to lessen the severeness of the negative consequences of compaction. For example, additional fertilization and irrigation to alleviate moisture and nutrient deficiencies and possible yield losses caused by compaction. Additional drainage can be an effective alleviation measure in case soil compaction causes water logging. Evidently, these measures do not solve the compaction problem, but only alleviate the negativeconsequencesofcompaction.(Mujdecietal.,2017;Ranaivosonetal.,2017).Insoil scienceliterature,alleviation measuresareoftenlabelledas ‘treatingthesymptomsbutnot the root cause’. As a result, alleviation measures are often disregarded by scientists, or considered as supplementary measures. Combined measures are common in practice, and are considered to be more efficient than single measures (Hamza and Anderson, 2005). The FAO voluntary guidelines for sustainable soil management also recommend combination of measures to prevent and mitigate soil compaction (FAO, 2017b). The need for a more coherent and integrated soil management concept was also recently emphasized by Rietra et al. (2022). A toolbox of strategies and management practices may be needed. 1.6 Knowledge gaps and research objectives Soil compaction is a complex process, as it is influenced by a myriad of interacting factors, including soil properties, environmental conditions and soil management. Compacted soils are not easily recognized and quantified, also because there is no common, routine monitoring of soil compaction in practice. This holds especially for the subsoil. There is also discussion about the most appropriate methods, indicators and threshold values for assessing soil compaction and compacted subsoils. Based on the literature review presented in paragraphs 1.1 to 1.6 it is evident that human‐ induced soil compaction is largely perceived as a problem of modern, mechanized agriculture. There is very little information and insight on the nature of soil compaction in small‐holder agriculture, and on the effectiveness of possible measures aimed at ameliorating and alleviating compacted subsoils in small‐holder agriculture. Of course, naturally compacted soils can be found everywhere in the world, and the problems with for example hardsetting soils in Africa, Brasil and Australia have been well described (e.g., (Daniells, 2012; Hoogmoed, 1987; Mullins et al., 1990). However, there is a lack of information on the effectiveness of measures addressing human‐induced soil compaction10 in small‐holder agriculture compared to mechanized agriculture. Is there a difference in the priority and effectiveness of measures, and if so, why? I hypothesized that the awareness and attention for soil compaction are more limited and recent in small‐holder agriculture than mechanized agriculture, and that there is greater use of alleviation measures than amelioration measures in small‐holder agriculture compared to mechanized agriculture. There is also little information about spatial variations in compacted (sub)soils in practice. First, there is no routine monitoring of soil compaction in farmers’ fields, because soil laboratoriesdonotyethaveappropriateandcheapmethodsforassessing(spatialvariations of) soil compaction in the field. Second, most research related to soil compaction has been conducted in the laboratory or in field experiments. Third, simulation models may simulate spatial variations in soil compaction, based on spatial variations in soil properties derived from soil maps, and land use and axle load characteristics derived from statistics, but these are often large‐scale variations beyond the field and farm scales. I hypothesized that there may be a significant within‐field spatial variation in compacted subsoils in practice, and that this spatial variation may show up in spatial variations in soil functioning. A wide range of measures have been proposed and tested to prevent or avoid soil compaction, to alleviate the impact of compacted (sub)soils, and/or to remediate compacted (sub)soils. There are also several good reviews that have summarized and synthesized the data and information of early experimental studies. However, a systematic comparison of recent results of soil compaction preventive measures, alleviation and remediation measures is lacking. Also, a comparison of the effects of aforementioned measuresbetween small‐holder farming and mechanized farming is missing. I hypothesized that soil compaction is less severe and more shallow in small‐holder farming systems than in mechanized systems, and that the effects of measures will be different therefore. Notillage(no‐till)withcropresiduereturntothesoilsurfacehasbeenpromotedasmeasure to save tillage and fuel costs, to minimize erosion and run‐off, to prevent the formation of plough pans (compacted subsoil below the plough layer), and to increase soil carbon sequestration. However, no‐till may decrease crop yield and increase emissions of nitrous oxide, which is a powerful greenhouse gas (Pittelkow et al., 2015a). Further, the effects of no‐till in small‐holder agriculture have not been elucidated yet. Examination of soil cultivation practices, including no‐till, requires long‐term studies, which are difficult to conduct in PhD studies. Luckily, I was involved (as MSc student) in the early stages of a long‐ termfieldexperimentinChina,whichexamineddifferentsoilcultivationpractices,andagain in thefinalstagesofthefieldexperiment(asPhDstudent),includingtheanalysisofthedata and write‐up of the results. This long‐term field experiment addressed the question which11 soil cultivation practice results in the highest crop yields and the least soil compaction, as derived from soil bulk density measurements. The literature review presented in paragraphs 1.1 to 1.6 also revealed that there is a need fornovelandhigh‐precision,low‐costmeasuresforamelioratingcompactedsubsoils.Deep‐ ploughing and subsoiling practices have been practiced for decades, but these practices have disadvantages. It is advocated that measures aimed at preventing subsoil compaction have to be prioritized, yet subsoil compaction is a continuing soil threat in mechanized agriculture. This suggests that there is a need for exploring alternative, high‐precision and low‐cost measures for ameliorating compacted subsoils. Evidently, developing and testing new measures is a long‐term effort and may require significant investment. I developed a prototypeofameasureaimed atamelioratingcompactedsubsoil, andtestedthisprototype in four field experiments in two countries in two years. ThegeneralobjectiveofmyPhDthesisresearchwastoincreasetheunderstandingofspatial variations in soil compaction in farmers’ fields, and of the efficacy of measures aimed at the prevention, alleviation and remediation of soil compaction. The specific research objectives were: i. to review the recent (from 2000) literature on measures aimed at the prevention, alleviation and remediation of soil compaction, and to examine possible difference between small‐holder and mechanized agriculture in the effectiveness of these measures; ii. to examine the relationships between spatial variations in subsoil compaction and spatial variations in soil properties, crop yield and nitrous oxide emissions; iii. to examine the effects of four soil tillage practices on soil bulk density, soil carbon and nutrient sequestration and crop yield in a long‐term field experiment; iv. to develop and test a prototype measure for high‐precision amelioration of compacted subsoil in small‐holder agriculture and mechanized agriculture. 1.7 Outline of my thesis In Chapter 2, I present the results of a meta‐analysis of the effects of soil compaction prevention, amelioration, and alleviation measures in mechanized and small‐holder agriculture, using published studies from the period 2000 to 2019/2020. The effects of the measures in terms of crop yield and soil physical properties were quantitatively analysed. In Chapter 3, I present the results of a field study conducted in four different fields in Hoeksche Waard, the Netherlands. Within‐field spatial variations in soil physical properties12 were quantitatively related to within‐field spatial variations in crop yield and potential CO2 and N2O emissions from soil. Soil measurements were conducted during the first half year of the study, while crop yields were collected over a period of 3 to 4 years. In Chapter 4, I present the results of a long‐term (18 years) field experiment conducted in Luancheng, China; the effects of different tillage systems on crop yield, soil bulk density and carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus sequestration in soil were analysed. Tillage practices included traditional tillage and reduced tillage (no‐till), combined with crop residue return or removal. In Chapter 5, I present the results of four field experiments, two of which were conducted in Luancheng, China, and two in Odiliapeel, The Netherlands. A prototype of a novel, high‐ precision bore‐hole measure for ameliorating compacted subsoil was tested, using maize and sorghum as test crops. Chapter 6 provides the general discussion and overall synthesis of my thesis research.13 2. Soil compaction prevention, amelioration and alleviation measures are effective in mechanized and smallholder agriculture: a meta‐analysis Background: The compactionofsubsoilsin agricultureis athreattosoil functioning. Measures aimed at the prevention, amelioration, and/or impact alleviation of compacted subsoilshavebeen studied formorethan acentury, butless in smallholder agriculture. Methods: A meta‐analysis was conducted to quantitatively examine the effects of the prevention, amelioration, and impact alleviation measures in mechanized and small‐holder agriculture countries, using studies published during 2000~2019/2020. Results: Mean effect sizes of crop yields were large for controlled traffic (+34%) and irrigation (+51%), modest for subsoiling, deep ploughing, and residuereturn(+10%),andnegativeforno‐tillage(−6%).Meaneffectsizesofsoilbulk density were small (<10%), suggesting bulk density is not a sensitive ‘state’ indicator. Meaneffectsizesofpenetrationresistancewererelativelylarge,withlargevariations. Controlled traffic had a larger effect in small‐holder farming than mechanized agriculture. Conclusion: We found no fundamental differences between mechanized and smallholder agriculture in the mean effect sizes of the prevention, amelioration, and impact alleviation measures. Measures that prevent soil compaction are commonly preferred, but amelioration and alleviation are often equally needed and effective, depending on site‐specific conditions. A toolbox of soil compaction prevention, amelioration, and alleviation measures is needed, for both mechanized and smallholder agriculture. Based on: Yang, P., Dong, W., Heinen, M., Qin, W., & Oenema, O. (2022). Soil Compaction Prevention, Amelioration and Alleviation Measures Are Effective in Mechanized and Smallholder Agriculture: A Meta‐Analysis. Land, 11(5), 645.14 2.1 Introduction Soil compaction is defined as the ‘densification of soil and the distortion of soil structure’, which cause deterioration or loss of one or more soil functions (Schjonning et al., 2015; van den Akker, 2008). Compacted soils have a relatively high soil bulk density and soil strength, a low number of macro pores and a relatively high tortuosity, and thereby a low hydraulic conductivity andwater infiltration rate (Batey,2009;Nawaz et al., 2013).These phenomena increase the risks of temporal water logging, runoff and erosion (Alam et al., 2017). Compacted soils impede root elongation and development, and thereby limit soil nutrient uptake and crop development, which in turn causes yield loss (Shaheb et al., 2021; Unger andKaspar,1994).Thealteredsoilaerationandwetnessandthedecreasedrootgrowthand crop production affect also soil biodiversity and biological activity, and thereby nutrient transformationsandgreenhousegasemissions(Nawazetal.,2013).Decreasedaerationand increased wetness may predispose compacted soils also to infection of root rot diseases (Laker and Nortjé, 2020). Compacted soils are widespread and have been recognized as a globalthreatformodernagriculture(CaonandVargas,2017;SondereggerandPfister,2021). Greatest concerns relate to subsoil compaction, because of the difficulty to ameliorate subsoil compaction (Alakukku et al., 2003; Techen et al., 2020). Compacted soils are not easily recognized. This relates specially to compacted subsoils. There are various measures to assess subsoil compaction (e.g., (Batey, 2009), but there is littleroutinemonitoringofsoilcompactioninpractice.Yet,theconcernsforsoilcompaction in scientific literature is steadily increasing (Fig. S2.1). This increased attention is especially related to the impacts of the increasing mechanization and wheel loads of machines in agriculture (Keller et al., 2019b). It was noted that a significant fraction of arable farmers in Germany are aware of the risk of intensive field traffic and high axle loads for subsoil compaction, but that this awareness had not yet led to adequate changes in practice (Ledermüller et al., 2021). Indeed, impacts of human‐induced (sub)soil compaction seem to increase over time (Antille et al., 2019; Soane and Van Ouwerkerk, 1995; Sonderegger and Pfister, 2021). Next to human induced soil compaction, through trafficking and ploughing (forming traffic and plough pans in the subsoil), soils may have become compacted through natural processes, e.g. during peri‐glacial conditions, or as a result of the illuviation of soil colloids, cracking and swelling processes (combined with topsoil tumbling down to the subsoil when cracks are open), heavy rains, and soil trampling by animals. Soils may have a compacted subsoil also because of an abrupt textural or mineralogical change with depth, due to a different geo‐genetic origin (Batey, 2009). The susceptibility of soils to compaction differs15 greatly. Most susceptible are soils with low soil organic matter content and a high content of silt (particles with a size of 20 to 50 μm). These soils often have a low structural stability and may be characterized as 'sealing, crusting and hardsetting' (Daniells, 2012; Laker and Nortjé, 2020). Measures to ameliorate and/or alleviate compacted subsoils have been explored almost as long as the problem has been realized (Passioura and Leeper, 1963; Wilkins et al., 1976). Hence, many studies have examined the effectiveness of measures to ameliorate (and/or alleviate the effects of) compacted subsoils, including deep tillage, subsoiling, reduced tillage, crop rotation, reduced trafficking and using soil amendments. Results of these studieshavebeendiscussedandsummarizedinsomeexcellentreviews.Forexample,Ungar and Kaspar (1994) reviewed studies examining root growth in compacted soils and suggested that tillage and growing deep‐rooted crops in rotations will help avoid and alleviate negative impacts. Soana and Van Ouwerkerk (1994) summarized the early studies related tothenatureandalleviation ofsoil compaction.While reviewingthe literaturesince theearly1990s,HamzaandAnderson(2005)identified8practicestoavoid,delayorprevent soil compaction, and suggested that combination of measures are most effective. The review of Batey (2009) largely confirmed the suggestions of Hamza and Anderson (2005) and emphasized the need for monitoring of soil compaction in practice. Nawaz et al. (2013) reviewed models simulating soil compaction and the effects of soil compaction, while Chamen et al (2015) reviewed studies examining the costs and benefits of measures aimed at ameliorating soil compaction. Schneider et al (2017) quantitatively examined the effects of deep tillage on crop yield, using a meta‐analysis of data from mainly Europe and North America,andobservedthatdeeptillageeffectswerehighlysite‐specific.Shahebetal(2021) reviewed how soil compaction affected different crop types and listed 12 management strategiestoalleviatesoilcompaction.Moststudiesfocusedonmechanizedagriculture,and paid little attention to smallholder agriculture. Of a different nature, Kodikara et al (2018) reviewed how soil compaction can be improved in civil engineering and transport. Evidently, soil compaction is a complex and persistent phenomenon affecting the sustainability of crop production in modern agriculture in large areas of the world. The threatofsubsoilcompactionforcropproductionisthoughttobemostsevereinmechanized agriculture with high axle loads on wet soils (Hargreaves et al., 2019; Obour and Ugarte, 2021; Schjonning et al., 2015; Techen et al., 2020). However, there are also reports on subsoil compaction in smallholder agriculture in for example China as a result of long‐term soil cultivation practices, irrigation and natural conditions (e.g. (Chen et al., 2022)). It is unclear whether theeffects of amelioration and alleviation measures aredifferent between mechanized and smallholder agriculture. Machine weight is much less and ploughing depth16 is also less in smallholder agriculture than mechanized agriculture. We hypothesized that amelioration and alleviation measures are more effective in smallholder agriculture than in highly mechanized agriculture, because compacted soil layers are likely more shallow in smallholder agriculture, and thus easier to remediate. We conducted a systematic review of the quantitative effects of measures aimed at preventing and ameliorating compacted subsoils or at alleviating the impacts of soil compaction on crop yield and soil physical properties, using a meta‐analysis of published studies conducted in areas with smallholder farms (mainly China), and in mechanized agriculture in Europe, America, and Australia. We categorized measures in three groups (Table S2.1), largely following (Chamen et al., 2015; Hamza and Anderson, 2005): (i) measures aimed at avoiding and preventing subsoil compaction, including minimized and controlled trafficking, zero and minimum tillage (rotary tillage and shallow harrowing); (ii) measures aimed at remediating compacted subsoils, including subsoiling, deep ploughing and crop rotation; and (iii) measures aimed at alleviating the effects of compacted subsoils, including residue return, controlled irrigation, manure application. This categorization of measures also fits in the DPSIR framework (Schjonning et al., 2015). Theobjectivesofourstudywere(1)toquantitativelyexaminetheeffectsofmeasuresaimed at avoiding and ameliorating soil compaction and at alleviating the impacts of compacted subsoils on crop yield, soil bulk density, and soil penetration resistance, using results of published studies; and (2) to examine the effectiveness of measures in smallholder and mechanized agriculture. We focused on the period 2000 to 2019/2020, because of the existence of some excellent reviews covering the earlier period, and because studies on smallholder agriculture conducted before 2000 are relatively scarce. 2.2 Materials and methods 2.2.1 Data collection and screening We searched for peer‐reviewed publications investigating the effectiveness of measures to address compacted (sub)soils, using Web of Science and China Knowledge Resource Integrated Database (CNKI, for Chinese studies not published in English language). Search terms were ("soil compaction" OR "compacted soil" OR "compacted subsoil" OR "subsoil compaction")AND(yieldORbiomass)AND("density"OR"penetration"OR"soilconeindex") in titles, keywords and abstracts. In Web of Science, conference proceedings and non‐ English publications were excluded. This search gave 719 publications published between 2000 to 2019 (until Aug 1, 2019). The search in the China Knowledge Resource Integrated17 Database yielded 74 additional publications (from 2000 to Aug 2019). The search process was followed by a screening procedure that was based on the following criteria: (1) field studies must include side by side comparisons of soil compaction prevention, remediation, and/or alleviation treatments and control (or reference) treatments; (2) for each paired comparison, treatments and reference treatments have the same location, cropping system, cropping management, and year; (3) grain yields and/or biomass yields were reported; (4) soil bulk density and/or soil penetration index data were reported; (5) the test crops were cereals, including wheat, maize, barley, oat, and sorghum; (6) location(s), year(s) and basic soil information of the experiment(s) were stated. Only studieswithcerealcropsastestcropswereincluded;onereasonistheimportanceofcereal crops in global food supply (FAO, 2021; McKevith, 2004), the other reason is that the results are likely more robust when using crops with similar root morphology and physiology (Shahebetal.,2021).Grainyieldand/orbiomassyieldwereusedascropresponseindicators. Following the aforementioned screening procedure, we obtained 378 comparisons (paired observations) of crop yields from 53 studies in 28 countries from Web of Science, and 159 comparisons of crop yields from 23 studies from CNKI. Treatment measures were recorded and grouped. The results of crop yield and soil bulk density/penetration resistance were extractedfromeachstudy,aswellascharacteristicsrelatedtolocation,experimentalyear(s), soil clay content andcroppingsystem (TableS2.1).In caseswherecropyieldand/orsoil bulk density and/or penetration results were presented in figures only, values were extracted using the GetData Graph Digitizer. 2.2.2 Categorization of the measures The paired observations were allocated to a category of measures, i.e., prevention, remediation,oralleviation measures.Thereissomedegreeofarbitrarinessin theallocation of measures. For example, the choice of crop type and crop rotation was categorized as remediation measure but could have been categorized as prevention or alleviation measures equally well. Further, alleviation measures were thought to alleviate the effects ofsoilcompaction,butmaycontributealsotoremediationorprevention,depending onthe environmental and management conditions. Thus, irrigation, fertilization, manure application, and straw return were thought to alleviate the impacts of compacted subsoils onrootgrowth(theirlimitedabilitytotakeupwaterandnutrientsfromcompactedsubsoils). Conventional (random) traffic was chosen as reference treatment for controlled traffic. In this case, a comparison was made between random (deliberate) trafficking and minimal or controlled trafficking, to infer the effects of controlled trafficking indirectly. Thus, random18 trafficking was used as reference treatment (worst‐case), while minimal trafficking or controlled trafficking as the remediation treatment. The reference treatment of manure application was no manure application, while residue return was compared to no residue return. Crop rotation effects were compared to effects of mono‐cropping. Soil bulk density and soil penetration resistance results were grouped into three depth intervals: 0‐20 cm (topsoil), 20‐40 cm (upper subsoil), and 40‐60 cm (lower subsoil). This groupingwasseenasacompromiseforcomparingsmallholderandmechanizedagriculture; the depth of soil cultivation in smallholder agriculture is commonly less than 20 cm but in mechanized agriculture often a bit deeper, depending also on tillage system). Also, about 80% of the roots of most cereal crops are in the upper 40 cm and more than 95% of the roots are in the upper 60 cm of the soil (Drew and Saker, 1980; Liu et al., 2012). Smallholder farms are mostly found in east and south Asia, Africa, and some countries of Latin America (Lowder et al., 2016), and mechanized agriculture with relatively high axle loads in North America, Oceania, Europe, and west Asia. Therefore, studies conducted in south and east Asia and Africa were considered to be small‐holder farming, while studies conducted in America, Europe, Australia, and west Asia were considered to be in mechanized agriculture. For more detailed information of the database composition, see Tables S2.1 and S2.2. 2.2.3 Definitions and calculations Our meta‐analysis basically followed the same approach as the one described by Qin et al. (2015). We used the natural logarithm of the ratio of the response variable of two treatments as the effect size (Hedges et al., 1999): ln(R)=ln(Xt/Xc), where R is the ratio, X is the response variable, and subscripts t and c refer to the specific treatment and control treatment. The response variable was either crop yield (X = Y), dry bulk density (X = BD), or penetration resistance (X = PR). For the calculation of a grouped effect size, a linear mixed‐effect model was used for which we used the R‐package ‘nlme’(Pinheiro et al., 2017). Mixed‐effect models are preferred to fixed‐effect models for statistical testing in ecological data synthesis because their assumption of variance heterogeneity is more likely to be satisfied (Hedges et al., 1999). In our study, results of treatments addressing soil compaction were set as fixed effects and studynumbersweresetasrandomeffects,toallowaccountingforvariancesamongstudies. We used the equal weighting method (e.g., (Van Groenigen et al., 2014)) when comparing studies with different number of replicates. The ln(R) of the individual pairwise comparison19 was used as the dependent variable. The mean effect size and the 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of each categorical group were estimated. The significance of the effects was statistically assessed at the 0.05 confidence level. In the graphs (forest plots), the effect‐size ofeachtreatmentwastransformedbackandconvertedtoapercentagechangeincropyield, dry bulk density, or penetration resistance relative to the control or reference treatment, i.e., data were presented as (R−1)∗100%. In case the value zero in such a forest plot falls outside the 95% CI, the given average value (effect size) is assumed to be significantly different from zero. 2.3 Results 2.3.1 Overview of the dataset Our dataset consisted of 557 yield comparisons, 620 soil bulk density comparisons, and 592 soil penetration resistance comparisons. About half of the number of bulk density comparisons dealt with the topsoil (346), and half with the subsoil (274). More yield comparisonswerefromcountrieswithpredominantlysmall‐holderfarming(S‐farming)(323) than from countries with predominantly mechanized agriculture (M‐agriculture) (234). More yield observations were related to prevention (221) and remediation measures (205) than alleviation measures (131, Fig. 2.1a). Yield observations of prevention measures were found more in M‐agriculture countries than in S‐farming countries. The number of yield observations related to remediation and alleviation measures was two times larger with S‐ farming than M‐agriculture (Fig. 2.1b, 2.1c). 2.3.2 Effects of measures on crop yields Fiveoutoftenmeasuresexaminedhadpositiveeffectsoncropyields,includingprevention, remediation, and alleviation measures (p < 0.05, Fig. 1a). Relatively large mean effect sizes were noted for controlled traffic (+26%) and irrigation (+51%). Mean effect sizes were also significantly positive for subsoiling, deep ploughing, residue return, and crop rotation (+8% to +11%). Minimum tillage and manure application did not display significant effects, while no tillage had a negative mean effect on crop yield (−6%). Differences between S‐farming and M‐agriculture in the mean effect sizes of prevention, remediation, and alleviation measures on crop yields were relatively small (Fig. 2.1b, 2.1c). The mean effect size of controlled traffic on crop yield was two time higher in M‐agriculture (+38%) than in S‐farming (+16%). However, the number of comparisons was much larger in M‐agriculture (88) than in S‐farming (21). Subsoiling was more studied in S‐farming than in M‐agriculture during the last 20 years and the mean effect on crop yield in S‐farming was20 positive(+8%).ControlledirrigationandmanureapplicationwereexaminedinS‐farmingbut not in M‐agriculture as possible measures to alleviate the effects of compacted subsoils. Evidently, controlled irrigation had a large effect size, but it is not realistic to ascribe this effect merely to the alleviation of soil compaction. Likely, crop yields in the reference treatments were limited by drought and not only by compacted subsoils. Fig. 2.1 Relative changes in crop yield (%) in response to soil compaction prevention, remediation and alleviation measures; means of all results (a); means of results from countries with mechanized agriculture (b); means of results from countries with small‐holder farming (c). Dots show means of treatments, error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. Numbers in the parentheses indicate number of comparisons. 2.3.3 Effects of measures on soil bulk density The measureshad a relatively small effect onthe soil bulk density of the top soil and subsoil (Fig. 2.2a, 2.2d), compared to their effects on crop yields (Fig. 2.1). Relative mean changes in bulk density were in the range of 0–9%. For the subsoil, which is most critical, controlled traffic, deep ploughing, subsoiling, residue return, and crop rotation decreased soil bulk density by on average2–9% (p <0.05;Fig.2.2d).Controlled irrigation increasedbulkdensity in the topsoil and subsoil, while minimum tillage increased subsoil bulk density by 3% (p < 0.05; Fig. 2.2d). Essentiallyallcomparisonsrelatedtotheeffectsofsubsoilinganddeepploughingonsubsoil bulk density originated from S‐farming. As a consequence, no proper comparison can be21 madebetweenS‐farmingandM‐agricultureontheeffectsofsubsoilinganddeepploughing. This holdsfor alleviation measuresaswell. Controlled traffickingdecreased soilbulkdensity in both topsoil and subsoil, and S‐farming and M‐agriculture. Fig.2.2Relativechangesinsoilbulk density (BD)inresponsetosoilcompactionprevention,remediationand alleviation measures for the topsoil (a, b, c) and for the subsoil (d, e, f); means of all results (a and d); means of results from M‐agriculture (b and e); means of results from S‐farming (c and f). Dots show means of treatments, error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. Numbers in the parentheses indicate number of comparisons.22 Fig. 2.3 Relative changes in soil penetration resistance (PR) in response to soil compaction prevention, remediation and alleviation measures for the topsoil (a, b, c) and for the subsoil (d, e, f); means of all results (a and d); means of results from M‐agriculture (b and e); means of results from S‐farming (c and f). Dots show means of treatments, error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. Numbers in the parentheses indicate number of comparisons.23 Fig. 2.4 Relative changes in crop yield (a) and soil bulk density (BD; for top soil, b; and subsoil, c) in response to various soil compaction prevention, remediation and alleviation measures; means and standard deviations of results from short‐term (<4 years), and long‐term (≥4 years) field experiments. Fig. 2.5 Relative changes in crop yield (%) in response to soil compaction prevention, remediation and alleviation measures; means of results from clay soil (clay content ≥17.5%) (a); means of results from sandy soil (clay content <17.5%) (b). Dots show means of treatments, error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. Numbers in the parentheses indicate number of comparisons.24 2.3.4 Effects of measures on soil penetration resistance Soil penetration resistance responded to the measures in a similar way as bulk density, but the relative changes were larger (Fig. 2.3a, 2.3d). Controlled traffic treatments had on average 33% lower penetration resistance in topsoils and 26% lower resistance in subsoils than the reference treatments. Subsoiling and deep ploughing decreased penetration resistance by 13% to 20% (p < 0.05, Fig. 2.3d). No tillage increased penetration resistance in the topsoil but not in the subsoil. Observations on subsoiling and deep ploughing originatedmainly from S‐farming countries, where these measures decreased penetration resistance. Residue return decreased penetration resistance in both topsoil and subsoil in S‐farming. The number of comparisons for residue return was too low in M‐agriculture to make firm statements. Irrigation slightly decreased penetration resistance in the topsoil but not in the subsoil in S‐farming. 2.3.5 Effects of experimental duration More than 80% of the comparisons dealt with short‐term experiments (1~3 years; Table S2.1).Tillagetreatments(deepploughing,subsoiling,notillage,minimumtillage)accounted for almost half (47%) of the long‐term experiments (≥4 years), followed by controlled traffic (23%).Forcontrolledtraffic,therelativeeffectsizeforcropyieldandforsubsoilbulkdensity tendedtoincreaseovertime(Fig.2.4a).Forcropyield,theeffectsizewas33%in short‐term and 37% in long‐term experiments, while subsoil bulk density was 4% lower in short‐term and6%lowerinlong‐termexperimentscomparedtothereferencetreatments(p<0.05;Fig. 2.4b, 2.4c). For deep ploughing, the relative effect size for crop yield and bulk density decreased over time. In short‐term (1~3 yrs) experiments, mean effect sizes were statistically significant on crop yields and bulk density (p < 0.05), but not in long‐term (≥4 yrs) experiments. Similar results were found for no tillage (Fig. 2.4). 2.3.6 Effects of soil texture Soil texture (silt and clay contents) and soil organic matter content affect the susceptibility of soils to compaction and also likely influence the effect sizes of measures. A clay content of 17.5% is commonly used as a threshold value in soil compaction evaluation. Soils with <17.5% clay are considered to be more susceptible to compaction than soils with ≥17.5% clay. Thus, we compared the effect sizes of measures for soils with <17.5% clay with soils having ≥17.5% clay. Yield effects were on average similar for the two textural classes (Fig. 2.5). However, light‐textured soils (<17.5% clay) showed greater responses to prevention and amelioration measures than heavy‐textured soils (≥17.5% clay). This was most notable forcontrolledtraffic.Effectsizesforyielddifferedbymorethanafactortwo(+49%vs.+19%;25 p < 0.05), for subsoiling (+12% vs. 3%), and deep ploughing (13% vs. 8%; p < 0.05). 2.4 Discussion 2.4.1 Understanding the cause‐effect relationships The cause–effect relationships of soil compaction and its mitigation measures can be analyzed and understood through the ‘driving forces, pressures, state, impact, responses’ (DPSIR) framework (Schjonning et al., 2015) . In agriculture, the driving forces often stem from the economic incentives to produce more and to lower costs, especially in affluent countries (Alakukku et al., 2003; Keller et al., 2019b). This leads to more intensive soil cultivationandtheuseoflargerandheaviermachines,whichexertsliterallypressureonthe soil. This pressure may lead to a densification of the (sub)soil, i.e., compacted (sub)soils, with impacts on water infiltration, root and crop growth, microbiological processes, and gaseous emissions, e.g., (Batey, 2009). The response of farmers and land managers may be directed towards avoiding or preventing soil compaction, i.e., addressing the driving forces and pressures, or they may focus on the amelioration of compacted soils, i.e., addressing the state, or at alleviating the impacts of compacted soils, or both (Fig. 2.6). Thus, the three categories of measures distinguished in our meta‐analysis (Table S2.2; Fig. 2.1) address different aspects of the cause–effect chain of soil compaction. Fig. 2.6 The Driver‐Pressure‐State‐Impact‐Response (DPSIR) concept with focus on soil compaction. The response measures indicate which part of the DPSIR chain is being addressed by the measures.26 Avoiding, preventing and precautionary strategies are preferred above amelioration and alleviation strategies, also because of the complexities and imperfections of the latter (Lebertetal.,2007;Schjonningetal.,2015).However,largeareasintheworldhavenaturally compactedsubsoils(e.g.,(Daniells,2012;LakerandNortjé,2020)),orhavebeencompacted by human activities in the past (Soane and Van Ouwerkerk, 1995), and thus will need amelioration and alleviation strategies. Moreover, the susceptibility of soils to densification and the farming and environmental conditions greatly differ across the world, suggesting that region‐ and farm‐specific strategies will be needed, and thus a toolbox of options and strategies. Our meta‐analysis contributes to this toolbox by examining quantitatively the effects of both prevention, amelioration, and alleviation measures. Depending onthe strategy,different indicators may beused for evaluating theeffectiveness of the strategy. Lebert et al (2007) discussed indicators for precautions against soil compaction (pressure indicators) and for the impairment of subsoil structure through compaction (state indicators). For the first, they proposed the ‘pre‐compression stress’ and ‘loading ratio’, which can be calculated for different soils, but need soil type specific calibration (2007). For assessing the impairment of subsoil structure, they proposed three indicators, i.e., air capacity (>5% air filled porosity at a water suction of pF 1.8), saturated water conductivity (< 10 cm day‐1 ), and a visual classification of the soil morphology (combination of a ‘spade diagnosis’ and measurements of the effective bulk density and packing density). The second suggested indicator (saturated water conductivity) basically is an impact indicator (and not a state indicator). Soil bulk density was not recommended as indicator for identification of ‘harmful’ soil compaction, because ‘there is no critical thresholdandclassificationscheme’accordingtotheauthors(Lebertetal.,2007).However, fortherelated‘packingdensity’(bulkdensitycorrectedforclay content)indicator, thereare criteria (Jones et al., 2003). Håkansson and Lipiec (2000) reviewed the usefulness of the relative soil bulk density, or the degree of compactness, which was defined as the dry bulk densityinpercentofareferencedrybulkdensityofthesamesoilobtainedbyastandardized, long‐term uni‐axial compression test at a stress of 200 kPa. Evidently, the measurements of the state of soil compaction are labor‐intensive and thus costly, especially when considering spatial within‐field variations (Lipiec and Usowicz, 2018; Yang et al., 2022). As a result, routinemonitoringofthestateofsoilcompaction in farmers’fieldsisnotcommonpractice. Indeed, it appears costly and there is debate about appropriate indicators and their interpretation. We observed that soil bulk density and penetration resistance are most commonly used as indicators for assessing the state of soil compaction in field experiments to test measures aimed at preventing, ameliorating, and/or alleviating soil compaction. However, bulk density is not a sensitive indicator (e.g., relative changes in soil bulk density following the implementation of measures are relatively small; Fig. 2.2), while penetration27 resistance is very sensitive to variations and changes in soil moisture content. Based on uni‐ axial tests, Panayiotopoulos et al (2003) showed that for a compression stress up to 300 kPa the dry bulk density changed up to 5~15%. This suggests that extreme changes in dry bulk density are not likely to occur. Further, measurements of penetration resistance should be performedatpressureheadsofabout−100cm.Itis,however,unlikelythatthiswasthecase in all studies. This may explain why a large variability in penetration resistance was found in the reviewed studies. Impact indicators relate to the changes in soil ecosystem functioning following a change in thedensification ofthesoil and associatedchanges in poresize distributions, tortuosity and soil structure. Possible impact indicators are crop yield, hydraulic conductivity, run‐off and ponding, and emissions of CO2, CH4 and N2O (Batey, 2009; Tullberg et al., 2018). There are no critical thresholds and classification schemes for assessing changes in soil functions, apart perhaps from hydraulic conductivity (Lebert et al., 2007). Yet, comparisons can be made between situations without and with compacted (sub)soils as in our meta‐analysis. Crop yield is probably the most powerful indicator in farmers’ practice, because of its influence on farm income, although part of a yield penalty may be nullified through alleviation measures, including irrigation and fertilization. In conclusion, the DPSIR framework is useful for analyzing and understanding the cause‐ effect relationship of soil compaction, but further work is needed to derive a proper set of indicators and threshold values. 2.4.2. Impacts of measures in low‐tech and high countries The mean effect of controlled traffic on crop yield was 38% (range 32–45%) in mechanized agriculture (M‐agriculture) and 16% (range 6–27%) in small‐holder farming (S‐farming). The wide range of yield effects is roughly in the same range as reported by Antille et al. in a review of 20 studies for various crops (Antille et al., 2019). The yield of crops was 0–98% higher when grown in the absence of field traffic compared to the yield of crops grown under typical traffic intensities. Controlled traffic was introduced in commercial‐scale farming inthe1990s,initiallyin Australiaandsubsequentlyin EuropeandnorthernAmerica (Rietra et al., 2022; Tullberg et al., 2007). The net economic benefit of controlled traffic increases with farm area. Conversely, the yield effect of controlled traffic needs to be relatively large to make controlled traffic economically attractive in small farms (Antille et al., 2019; Chamen et al., 2015). It is therefore no surprise that the number of experimental studies was much larger in M‐agriculture than S‐farming (Fig. 2.1b, 2.1c). Interestingly, the mean yield effect of controlled traffic was on average a factor of two smaller in S‐farming28 than inM‐agriculture, whichmay indeed reflectdifferencesin axelloadsbetween S‐farming and M‐agriculture. Zero‐tillage minimizes the traffic of soil‐cultivating tractors and was therefore considered to be a preventive measure for soil compaction, but it does not necessarily control the traffic of other (e.g., harvesting) machines in the field. There is a lot of interest in zero‐tillage and minimum tillage (e.g., (Rietra et al., 2022), as it saves labor and fuel cost, minimizes erosion (especiallywhencombinedwithsurfacemulching),andcontributestoenhancedsoilcarbon sequestration.However, it increases N2O emissions and decreasescrop yield. The latter is in agreement with our findings (Fig. 2.1). Further, it tends to increase the soil bulk density and penetration resistance of the topsoil (Fig. 2.2, 2.3). The no‐till (or reduced‐till) compacted topsoils limit root penetration and plant growth (Troccoli et al., 2015), while crop residues remaining on the soil surface may increase the incidence of viruses and plant pathogens (Pittelkow et al., 2015a), and lower the soil temperature (Ali et al., 2018; Graven and Carter, 1991). Our study indicates that current zero‐tillage and minimum tillage practices are much less effective as a preventive measure for soil compaction than controlled traffic. However, there is a need for more soil physical and soil structural measurements (including bulk density) of the subsoil in no‐till systems to confirm our findings. Deepploughingandsubsoilingincreasedcropyieldsbyonaverage10%and9%,respectively, though with relatively large uncertainty bars (Fig. 2.1a). These mean effects were derived mainly from studies conducted in S‐farming and reported between 2000 and 2019/2020. Schneider et al. (2017) reported rather similar mean positive effects of deep tillage on crop yield (6%), based on a meta‐analysis of 45 studies (67 field experiments) that were mainly conducted in Europe and North America between 1918 and 2014 (only three studies were reported after 2000, namely one from North America, one from Argentina, and one from China). They noted that the popularity of deep tillage decreased from the 1970s. Peralta et al. Peralta et al. (2021) also found positive mean effects of subsoiling on the yield of maize (+6%) and soybean (+26%) in no‐till systems in Argentina, using a meta‐analysis of 32 field studies. Our study indicates that positive effects of deep tillage on crop yields also hold for smallholder farming, notably China, for both deep tillage and subsoiling. Schneider et al. (Schneider et al., 2017) found that the mean effect size of deep tillage on crop yield depended on the silt content of the topsoil, the density of the subsoil, and drought, but not on the deep tillage method (subsoiling vs. deep ploughing and deep mixing) and tillage depths. The strong interference by drought agrees with our observation that irrigation alleviates the effects of compacted subsoils and greatly increases crop yield (Fig. 2.1). The effect of deep ploughing on crop yield decreased over time (Fig. 2.4). A similar trend was observed in the meta‐analysis studies of Schneider et al. (2017) and Peralta et al. (2021).29 The decreasing effect of deep tillage over time is likely the result of re‐compaction (Peralta et al., 2021; Schneider et al., 2017). Our analyses indicate that deep tillage decreased soil bulk density (Fig. 2.2) and penetration resistance (Fig. 3) of the topsoil and subsoil. Similar decreaseswerenotedforthetopsoilbyPeraltaetal.(2021),butneitherPeraltaetal.(2021) nor Schneider et al. (2017) reported changes in soil bulk density and/or penetration resistance for the subsoil in response to deep tillage. Alleviation measures mainly aim to lessen the negative impacts of compacted subsoils on root and crop growth. Roots elongate less in compacted and dry soils due to a combination of mechanical impedance and water stress (Bengough et al., 2011) , and thereby have less access to soil moisture and nutrients. Irrigation thus greatly alleviates the negative impacts ofcompactedsubsoilsoncropyield.Themeaneffectsizeofirrigationoncropyieldwas50% (Fig. 2.1). However, irrigation increased soil bulk density in the topsoil and subsoil (Fig. 2.2). These results are based on observations in S‐farming countries only, i.e., mainly China. Crop residue return or surface mulching also had a positive on crop yield, likely because of its effect on soil water preservation (Qin et al., 2015). Crop residue return decreased soil bulk density (Fig. 2.2), possibly as a result of enhanced soil carbon sequestration (Rietra et al., 2022).Onlyafewstudiesexplicitlyexaminedtheeffectsofmanureapplicationonalleviating impactsofcompactedsubsoilsoncropyield.Nosignificanteffectsoncropyieldswerefound, but manure application in S‐farming tended to decrease soil bulk density, possibly through enhancing soil organic carbon contents (Mujdeci et al., 2017; Ranaivoson et al., 2017). In summary, alleviation measures ‘treat the symptoms but not the root cause’, yet some of thesemeasurescanbehighlyeffective,alsoincaseswhereameliorationmeasureswerenot much effective. 2.4.3 Managing soil compaction A common opinion is that ‘the best way to manage soil compaction is to prevent it from happening’. The popularity of controlled traffic and reduced or no till practices reflects this opinion. The increasing wheel loads and weight of agricultural machinery in practice in especiallyEuropeandNorthAmericaduringthelast60yearsdonotreflectthisopinion.The increase in machinery weight has resulted in an increase in subsoil compaction, which may have contributed to crop yield stagnation and to an increase in the incidence of flooding in Europe (Keller et al., 2019b). The cascade of possible impacts from soil compaction beyond field and farm scales (e.g., increased risk of flooding, runoff, and erosion) could be seen as driver for actions by policy (Horn et al., 1995a; Thorsøe et al., 2019). However, soil compaction is not subject to a coherent set of rules in, for example, the European Union (EU), and is also not mentioned in the recent EU soil strategy for 2030 (Commission, 2021).30 Thus, farmers depend on the insights and guidelines of their own and their advisors when it comes to handling soil compaction, while there are essentially no monitoring data concerning farmers’ fields. There is less risk of soil compaction by machines in small‐holder farming in China, for example, than in the mechanized agriculture of Europe, North America, and Oceania. There is also no governmental policy aimed at preventing soil compaction in China. However, the intensive cultivation practices and irrigation, and the silty texture of the dominant loss soils in north China are conducive to soil compaction, and there is therefore a continuous search for soil conservation practices that decrease the risk of soil compaction and improve soil structure (Chen and Shaw, 2022; Zhou et al., 2019). A combination of tillage practices in sequenceappears to bethebest strategy(Fen etal.,2021;He etal.,2019;Tian etal.,2016). This holds for no‐till as well. However, it has to be combined with subsoiling once in a few years, as also discussed for the no‐till agriculture in Argentina by Peralta et al. (2021). The need for combining tillage practices in China also follows indirectly from the increasing interest in subsoiling during the last two decades (e.g., Fig. 2.1 (Chen et al., 2022)). The FAO voluntary guidelines for sustainable soil management do provide technical and policy recommendations to prevent and mitigate soil compaction (FAO, 2017a). Though qualitative and without threshold values, these guidelines are interesting because they addressnotonlythemachinesandvehiclesinthefield,butalsotheimportanceofcroptype and crop rotation, soil organic matter content, soil macrofauna, and microbial and fungal activities. Amelioration measures are not explicitly mentioned, apart from the recommendation to also grow crops with strong tap roots able to penetrate and break up compactedsoils.Nexttosoilcompaction,theFAOguidelinesalsopresentrecommendations to prevent and mitigate nine other soil threats (FAO, 2017a). The need for a more coherent and integrated soil management concept was also recently emphasized by Rietra et al. (2022). They presented a roadmap for developing high‐yielding, soil‐improving, and environmentally sound cropping systems. This roadmap involves an iterative selection and optimization of site and farm specific crop husbandry and soil management practices, including the selection of machines that minimize soil compaction. Evidently,preventingsoilcompactionfromhappeningistoosimpleastrategytoaddresssoil compaction.Rather,atoolboxofstrategiesandmanagementpracticesisneeded,whichcan be used to develop and implement site‐specific management measures. Our study provides evidence that both prevention, amelioration, and alleviation measures have value, depending on the site‐specific conditions. These measures provide net economic benefits for farms in most cases, through increases in crop yields and resource use efficiency31 (Chamen et al., 2015; Hallett et al., 2012). The selection of the most appropriate measures will likely improve, and the effectiveness of these measures will likely increase, when more data become available at the farm level, related to the state and impact of soil compaction, through routine monitoring. 2.4.4 Limitations of our study We focused on the recent literature (2000–2019/2020), because there are some excellent papersthatreviewedandanalyzedtheolderliterature,e.g.,(Mariottietal.,2020;Schneider et al., 2017), and not many studies have been conducted in small‐holder agriculture before 2000. We examined literature from both mechanized agriculture and small‐holder farming to make comparisons between these two types of agricultural systems, based on the literature from 2000–2019/20. We note that the literature from S‐farming countries from before 2000 has not been analyzed in a systematic manner yet, apart from the studies by Hoogmoed et al. (1992), and the reviews by Laker and Nortjé (2020), and Peralta et al. (2021). Further, we note that the machine weight is rapidly increasing over time (Keller et al., 2017), not only in M‐agriculture countries, but also in some S‐farming countries. Hence, the rough categorization in S‐farming and M‐agriculture countries may not be the best way to examine differences between mechanized and smallholder agriculture, although this comparison provided new insights, e.g., related to the type of measures applied in the two types of agriculture. Crop types may respond differently to compacted soils and thereby also to prevention, amelioration, and alleviation measures, because of differences in root morphology and physiology (Ball et al., 2005; Bengough et al., 2011). We selected cereals as test crops because these were mostly used and have a more or less uniform response. Thereby, we excluded 183 studies with non‐cereal test crops out of the 719 available studies (25%). Further, we excluded studies that combined various measures, e.g., controlled traffic combined with no tillage, controlled traffic combined with deep tillage, tillage combined with residue management levels, and irrigation combined with subsoiling. The exclusion of thesestudiesdoesnotmeanthatthesestudiesarelessrelevant.Instead,itrequiresanother study to infer useful conclusions from these combined‐measures studies.32 2.5 Conclusions Our meta‐analysis included 77 studies from 28 countries (32 studies from 16 countries for mechanized agriculture (M‐agriculture), and 45 studies from 12 countries for small‐holder farming (S‐farming)) all related to the effectiveness of soil compaction prevention, amelioration, and alleviation measures. These studies were published between 2000 and 2019/2020 and thus are relatively recent. Prevention measures were mostly studied in M‐ agriculture, while remediation and alleviation measures were mostly studied in S‐farming. Soil compaction prevention, through controlled traffic, had a positive effect on crop yield in both M‐agriculture (+38%) and S‐farming (+16%) countries, and led to a lower soil bulk density in topsoilandsubsoil(−4%to−6%),andtoalowersoilpenetrationresistance(−26% to −33%). These results confirm earlier estimates for M‐agriculture countries but now show that controlled traffic also holds promise for S‐farming. However, it is not clear whether controlled traffic is economically profitable in S‐farming. Soil compaction prevention through no‐till had negative effect on crop yield, while bulk density was increased, in both M‐agriculture and S‐farming. Soilcompaction ameliorationthroughdeeptillage(including subsoiling)hadpositiveeffects on crop yields (+9% to +10%), while soil bulk density was decreased by about 3%. These results confirm earlier observations for M‐agriculture, but we show that these observations are also valid for S‐farming. The relatively large number of studies related to deep tillage in S‐farming suggest that subsoil compaction is increasingly seen as a constraint to crop production in the countries with S‐farming. Irrigationwasaneffectivealleviationmeasureforsubsoilcompaction,thoughonlyreported for S‐farming. The large mean effect size for crop yield (+51%) reflects that compacted soils impede root elongation and thereby enhance the impacts of drought, though the effect of irrigationlikelyrelatesnotonlytoalleviationofdroughtrelatedtocompactedsubsoils.Crop residue mulching and manure application had a small effect on alleviating compacted subsoils. Soilpenetrationresistanceandbulkdensityweremostlyusedasstateindicators.Effectsizes of measures on soil bulk density were small (<10%), indicating that bulk density is not a sensitive indicator for assessing the effects of measures. Effect sizes of crop yield as an impact indicator were relatively large, but variable because of interfering factors (climate, soil texture).33 A toolbox of soil compaction prevention, amelioration, and alleviation measures is also needed because the cause of soil compaction and the responses of measures are site‐ specific. Our meta‐analysis indicates that such a toolbox is needed for M‐agriculture and S‐ farming.

The present study was carried out in the EU project SoilCare (“Soil care for profitable and sustainable crop production in Europe”), EU grant agreement 677407; and National Key Research and Development Program of China (2021YFD190100202). Fig. S2.1 Number of papers published per year, studying the relationships between soil compaction and crop yield. Searched by “soil compaction * yield” in Web of Science, from 1980 to 2021 Table S2.1 Studies included in this meta‐analysis ID References Country clay content Duration 1 Abu‐Hamdeh NH, 2003 Jordan 0.41 2 2 Afzalinia S, 2014 Iran 0.41 2 3 Ahmad N, 2009 Pakistan 0.2 1 4 Andersen MN, 2013 Denmark 0.07 1 5 Bhattacharyya R, 2015 India 0.1 4 6 Blanco‐Canqui H, 2007 USA 0.153 2

8 Cai Lijun. 2014 China 0.08 1 9 Chen H, 2013 China 0.037 9

12 Chen Yi. 2013 China 0.28 1 13 Chen Yi. 2014 China 0.28 1 14 Diaz‐Zorita M, 2000 Argentina 0.145 1 15 Edward WILCZEWSKI Poland 0.06 3 16 Feng Fuxue. 2010 China 0.1 2 17 Filipovic D, 2006 Croatia 0.228 1

19 Ge Shuangyang. 2017 China 0.3555 1 20 Giacomeli et al. 2017 Brazil 0.265 1 21 Gregory AS, 2007 UK 0.14 2

23 Hamza MA, 2008 Australia 0.035 1 24 Hao Yaxing. 2015 China 0.37 1 25 Hassan FU, 2007 Pakistan 0.12 1 26 He Mingrong. 2004 China 0.18 2

28 Huang Yingbo. 2016 China 0.3287 3 29 Iijima M, 2005 Japan 0.302 2 30 Ishaq M, 2003 Pakistan 0.24 4 31 Ivan A. Dozier US 0.1 2

33 Kong Xiangbin. 2012 China 0.15 1 34 Kustermann B, 2013 Germany 0.222 11 35 Lars J. Munkholm Canada 0.16 2 36 Li Bangfa. 2016 China 0.12 1 37 Liu Ming. 2012 China 0.182 1 38 Lopez‐Garrido R, 2014 Spain 0.25 4 39 Malecka I, 2015 Poland 0.12 10 40 Martinez I, 2014 Chile 0.148 2 41 Maughan MW, 2009 USA 0.35 1 42 Moraru PI, 2012 Romania 0.439 3

44 Mueller L, 2009 Canada 0.15 10 45 Mueller L, 2009 Germany 0.255 10 46 Munkholm LJ, 2005 Denmark 0.132 6 47 Munkholm LJ, 2008 Denmark 0.09 235 48 Nevens F, 2003 Belgium 0.123 1 49 Pang Xu. 2013 China 0.14 3

51 Peng Chenglin. 2019 China 0.126 1 52 Qiao Yunfa. 2018 China 0.1741 1 53 Raus L, 2016 Romania 0.41 4 54 Reintam E, 2008 Estonia 0.15 1 55 Reintam E, 2009 Estonia 0.13 1 56 Salem HM, 2015 Spain 0.21 1 57 Schjonning P, 2016 Denmark 0.34 4 58 Seehusen T, 2014 Norway 0.39 1 59 Singh VK, 2006 India 0.16 2 60 Singh, K.2019 India 0.08 1 61 Singh, S. P.2017. Bangladesh, India， Nepal 0.22 1

63 T. GŁA˛B Poland 0.25 8 64 T. Seehusen.2019 Norway 0.095 1 65 Tolon‐Becerra A, 2011 Spain 0.2167 1 66 Tracy BF, 2008 USA 0.35 4 67 Tran Ba Linh Vietnam 0.66 10 68 Wang Chanjun. 2011 China 0.15 1 69 Wang Y, 2005 Canada 0.617 2

72 Yan Yongxin, 2010 China 0.0755 5 73 Yan Yufei. 2010 China 0.34 1 74 Zhang Fengjie. 2016 China 0.1686 1 75 Zhang Yayun. 2017 China 0.09 1

Table S2.2 Soil compaction prevention, remediation and alleviation measures; their mechanisms and limitations. Measures Description/explanation/ definition Main limitations Prevention CTF traffic avoid irreversible plastic deformation of the soil, through minimizing the ground contact area of wheels the high entry cost; long intervals between machinery replacements No/min til Avoids negative effects of conventional tillage; High saturated and unsaturated hydraulic conductivity; High soil moisture and water use efficiency; Weed control cost, chemical herbicides use; Elevated moisture levels in the topsoil may promote fungal diseases; Yield decreases (especially in the short term) Harrow tillage A harrow whose cutting edges are a row of concave metal discs, which may be scalloped, set at an oblique angle. Only the soil within the vicinity of the disc harrow action (0–20 cm) was influenced Rotary tillage The loosening and inverting of soil to a depth of 20–25 cm with a rotating tines or blades. only works on topsoil compaction; brings residues to sowing depth, thereby affecting crop emergence rate; Remediation subsoiling to shatter dense subsurface soil horizons without turning the soil and burying fertile topsoil in the subsoil power and energy consuming; effects last shortly; Increases the vulnerability to re‐compaction Deep tillage To break up high density to a depth of 40–50 cm or more Power and energy consuming; Turns soil profiles; Reduces earthworm diversity and numbers; Soil structure deterioration in the long‐term Rotation biological drilling Limited by types of crops; Alleviation Residue returning Increase soil organic matter, binding soil mineral particles; reducing aggregate wettability; increasing soil mechanical strength lead to excessive soil moisture and water logging in flood; lower soil temperatures in cooler climates; Irrigation Alleviate water deficiency; Negative effects on crop yields and soil bulk density are also detected Manure application Provide nutrient, and alleviate yield loss due to water and nutrient deficiency. Possible air pollution due to N2O emission and water pollution due to leaching37 3. Within‐field spatial variations in subsoil bulk density related to crop yield and potential CO2 and N2O emissions Subsoil compaction is an increasing problem in modern agriculture, but is not easily recognized in practice, also because of possible within‐field spatial variations. This paper addresses the question of how within‐field spatial variations in soil bulk density and other soil characteristics relate to within‐fieldspatialvariationsincropyieldandpotentialCO2 andN2Oemissionsfromsoil.Fourfields (5 to 20 ha each) were selected at the suggestion of crop farmers, and sampled using a random soil sampling design (100 samples per field). Undisturbed soil samples were taken at depth of 5‐10, 30‐ 35, and 50‐55 cm and soil bulk density and potential CO2 and N2O emissions measured under controlled conditions. At each sampling point, also top soil (0‐20 cm) samples were taken for determination of pH, texture, SOM, and (micro)nutrients, and soil penetration resistance measurementsandvisualassessmentsofsoilstructureweremade.Wheatyieldswererecordedwith harvesters equipped with GPS and yield recorders. Meansoilbulkdensityinthe sub‐soil(30‐35cm)ranged betweenfieldsfrom 1.36±0.08 to1.60±0.11 gcm‐3.Meanwheatyieldsrangedbetweenfieldsandyearsfrom7.6±0.6and11.3±2.4Mgha‐1.Semi‐ variogram analyses showed that crop yields and soil properties were mostly spatially dependent; nugget‐to‐sill ratios were < 25% with ranges of 137 to 773 m. The ratio of CO2 emissions to N2O emissions was negatively related to soil bulk density, especially following N application. In conclusion, within‐field spatial variations in subsoil bulk density were successfully related to spatial variations in crop yield and potential CO2 and N2O emissions. The ratio of CO2 emissions to N2O emissions had a much greater response to spatial variations in soil bulk density than wheat yield. Our study suggests that N2O emission factors may depend on (sub)soil bulk density. Based on: Yang, P., Reijneveld, A., Lerink, P., Qin, W., & Oenema, O. (2022). Within‐field spatial variations in subsoil bulk density related to crop yield and potential CO2 and N2O emissions.

3.1 Introduction Subsoil compaction is an increasing problem in modern agriculture, but is not easily recognized in practice. Reports indicate that > 68 million ha of agricultural land in the world have compacted subsoils. More than half of this area is in Europe (Hamza and Anderson, 2005; Wahlström et al., 2021). Soil compaction is commonly defined as the densification and distortion of soil by which total porosity and air‐filled porosity are reduced and one or more soil functions are deteriorated (Banerjee et al., 2019; Huber et al., 2008; Schjonning et al., 2015). By reducing air permeability and limiting water infiltration, soil compaction may restrict root growth and nutrient uptake, which consequently affect soil functioning, including crop productivity, infiltration and storage of water and the decomposition of organic matter and transformation of nutrients (Keller et al., 2013). Compaction may be induced by natural factors, like alternate freezing‐thawing and trampling of animals, as well as by human influences, i.e., through soil cultivation and heavy machinery (Keller et al., 2019b). Indicators for soil compaction include increases over time of soil bulk density, Relative Normalized Density (RND, defined as the actual dry bulk density divided by a critical or threshold bulk density), penetration resistance, and decreases over time of macro‐porosity andinfiltration capacity(Chamen etal.,2015;Shah etal.,2017b;Stolte etal.,2015; vanden Akker and Hoogland, 2011). Not all these indicators can be measured easily in the field and they do not equally account for changes in the volume distribution of voids and their connectivity. As a result, relationships between indicators for subsoil compaction and soil functioning are not always straightforward (Horn et al., 1995b; Keller et al., 2017). Most of our understanding of subsoil compaction and its effects has been obtained in controlled condition experiments, also because there is no routine monitoring in farmers’ fields of soil compaction and/or soil bulk density. Also, measurements of within field spatial variations in sub‐soil bulk density have been carried out mostly in experimental fields (e.g., (Awal et al., 2019; Barik et al., 2014; Usowicz and Lipiec, 2017). Very few studies have examined spatial variations in subsoil bulk density in farmers’ fields and have tried to relate these variations to spatial variations in crop yield and soil (microbiological) processes. The overall aim of our study was to increase the understanding of within‐field spatial variations in(sub)soilbulkdensityinfarmers’fields,anditsrelationshipswithspatialvariationsincrop yield and potential CO2 and N2O emissions (the latter as proxies for microbial activity). We hypothesized that (i) subsoil compaction is partly ‘hidden’ in spatial within‐field variations in farmers’ fields, and (ii) within‐field spatial variations in subsoil compaction contribute to spatial variations in crop yield and soil microbial activity.39 3.2 Materials and methods 3.2.1 Study area The study was conducted in Hoeksche Waard, one of the islands (300 km2 ) in the delta of southwest Netherlands (Fig. 3.1). It has a temperate maritime climate with cool summers andmoderatewinters.Annualmeanprecipitationis850mm,ratherevenlydistributedover the year. Hoeksche Waard is mainly used for arable farming (Ecorys, 2007); crop rotations include potato, sugar beet, winter wheat and horticultural crops (Crittenden et al., 2015; Steingrover et al., 2010). Most farms are family farms, but contractors may do part of the fieldwork(e.g.,manureapplicationandpotato,wheatandsugarbeetharvesting).Farmsize ranges between 50 to 500 ha, depending in part on crop rotations. Fields are flat (slope <0.1%) and are drained by surrounding ditches and subsurface drains at depth of 0.8 to 1.2 m with10 to30 mwidespacings.Manyfields havebecomelarger over time throughclosing ditches and re‐parceling. Soils have developed in marine deposits and have light clay to sandy clay texture in the upperhalfmeterandloamysandbelow.TheyareclassifiedasCalcaricFluvisols(WRB,2006). Mean groundwater level in winter is 45~60 cm and in summer 140~170 cm below soil surface. Fig. 3.1 Locations of the study area in the delta of south‐west Netherlands. The inset shows the location of the four study fields.40 3.2.2 Soil sampling design Four fields with different shape and size (from 5.3 to 20.7 ha) and from four different farms werechosen(Fig.3.1),followingdiscussionswithfarmersofthefoundationH‐Wodka,which aims at enhancing the vitality of the rural agricultural community, nature and landscape in Hoeksche Waard through innovation. The farmers have concerns about the sustainability of current agricultural practices; they consider that spatial variations in soil compaction and soil fertility are possible barriers for increasing crop yield, but currently have no data and information to underpin these concerns. Farmers either had a 1:4 crop rotation (potatoes ‐ winterwheat/vegetables/onions–sugarbeet–winterwheatwithcovercrops)ora1:3crop rotation (potatoes – sugar beet/onions/vegetables – winter wheat). We selected fields in winter wheat; these fields had potatoes or sugar beet as pre‐crops. Farmers ploughed the top25cmofsoilwithamoldboardplough,priortoseeding winterwheatinrowswitharow distance of 12.5 cm. They aim at 250‐300 wheat plants per m2 , 550 to 600 ears per m2 , and a grain yield of ≥10 Mg ha‐1 yr‐1 . A total of 100 soil‐sampling points were randomly selected within each field, using ArcGis software, in the spring of 2016. A total of 100 samples per field is generally considered to be an appropriate number for obtaining adequate insight in the spatial pattern of soil properties in agricultural fields of modest areas (Kerry and Oliver, 2007; Lawrence et al., 2020). At each sampling point, two sampling approaches were implemented. First, 5 samples of the topsoil (0‐20 cm depth) were taken by augers within a circle with a radius of 5 m and then bulked and mixed (total weight about 2 kg) in plastic bags and transported within 5 hours to a temperature conditioned room (4°C) until further analysis. Secondly, undisturbedsoilsamplesweretakenateachpointbystainlesssteelringsofexactly100cm3 , at three different depths. Soil sampling depths were based on observations in soil pits and discussions with farmers, and were uniform for all fields: 5‐10 cm (plough layer), 30‐35 cm (underneath the plough layer), and 50‐55 cm, using the same auger hole. The undisturbed soilsamplesinstainlesssteelringswithplasticcapsonthetopandbottomweretransported in wooden boxes within 5 hours to a temperature conditioned room (4° C) and stored until furtheranalysis.Eachfieldwassampledwithintwotothreeconsecutivedays;allfieldswere sampled within a three‐weeks period.41 Fig. 3.2 Soil sampling points (green dots) in one of the fields (left panel), and a sketch of the recording of grain yield (yellow dots) with the harvester in a field (right‐hand side figure). The circles indicate how grain yield recordings were allocated to a soil sampling point, in two ways, using a radius of 5 or 10 m around the soil sampling point (see text). Harvested yield recordings (yellow points) were implemented by real‐time measurements and GPS equipped on the harvest machine. Penetrationresistancewasmeasuredwithahand‐heldpenetrograph(Stibokapenetrograph, Eijkelkamp Agrisearch Equipment, Giesbeek, the Netherlands). Within a circle with a radius of 5 m around each sampling point, the penetrometer was pushed into the soil manually at a fixed speed of about 30 mm s‐1 (ASABE, 2006) at three randomly selected places. The area of the conical point was 1cm2 and the measuring depth was 0 to 80 cm. Results for depth of 5‐10 cm, 30‐35 cm, and 50‐55 cm depth were averaged per sampling point. Penetrometer measurements of a single field were carried out within one day. Soil structure assessments of the top soil (0‐5 cm) were made on the basis of visual observations (Mueller et al., 2009; Pulido Moncada et al., 2014). Soil aggregation (structureless, weak structure, moderate structure, and strong structure), aggregate shape (granular, blocky, prismatic & columnar, and platy), and aggregate size (fine (<0.5 mm), medium(0.5 ‐2 mm), coarse(2.0 ‐5 mm), and very coarse(>5 mm)), were recorded at each sampling point. 3.2.3 Soil analyses Samples from the topsoil (disturbed) were dried at 40 °C overnight. Near Infra‐Red Spectroscopy was used for analyzing soil texture, soil organic matter, N‐total, S‐total and42 CaCO3 according NEN‐EN‐ISO 17184(ISO17184,2014).TheNIRS methodwas calibratedand validated on the basis of thousands of different soil samples from different areas in Europe (Reijneveld et al., 2021). The CaCl2 extraction method (0.01 M; 1:10 (w/v) combined with Inductivity Coupled Plasma (ICP), Inductivity Coupled Plasma‐Massa Spectrometry (ICP‐MS) and segmented flow analyses (for NH4+ and NO3 ‐ ) were used to measure plant‐available (micro) nutrients (N, S, P, K, Mg, Na, Si, Fe, Zn, Mn, Cu, Co, B, Mo, Se), following NEN 5704 (1996) and Van Erp (1998). The pH of the CaCl2 extract was measured with a combination electrode and a potentiometer. These analyses were conducted by Eurofins Agro (https://www.eurofins.com/agro). Undisturbed soil samples in stainless steel rings were measured for soil bulk density and potential emissions of N2O and CO2 in temperature (16 °C) and humidity (60%) conditioned rooms at Wageningen University. These emission determinations are meant to reflect the intrinsiccharacteristicsofthesoilsamplesatuniformenvironmentalconditions(andnotthe actual or in‐situ emissions in the field), and are therefore termed ‘potential emissions. Followingpre‐incubationat16°Cfor1day,theuncappedsoilsamplesinstainlesssteelrings wereputin1LPVCjarswithscrewlidwithrubberseptafor60minutes.Changesinpotential N2O and CO2 concentrations in the headspace of the jars were measured via the photo‐ acoustic infrared gas analyser Innova 1312 (LumaSense Technologies A/S, Ballerup, Denmark). After these flux measurements, 12 ml NaNO3 solution (2.4 g N L‐1 ) was gently sprayed on top of each soil sample, to simulate a common N fertilization of 150 kg per ha. One day (24 hours), four and six days after fertilization, soil samples were put in jars again, and changes in N2O and CO2 concentrations in the headspace were measured; these are reported as ‘induced N2O and CO2 emissions. N2O emissions were calculated using the following equation: . (1) Here, F is the emission rate (mg N2O‐N m‐2 day‐1 ); C is the measured N2O concentration (mg N2O‐N m‐3 ); O is the initial N2O concentration (mg N2O‐N m‐3 ); V is the volume of the headspace (jar volume minus soil cylinder volume, L); A is the cross‐sectional area of soil sample (m2 ); T is the closing time (h); 22.4 is the number of moles per volume of air (1 liter = 1/22.4 mol); 28 is the mol weight of N in N2O (1 mol N2O‐N = 28 g N). Similarly, CO2 emissions were calculated using the following equation: . (2) The parameters are the same as in equation (1), with 12 the mol weight of C (1 mol CO2 = 12 g C).43 AfterthepotentialCO2 and(induced) N2O emission measurements,soilsamplesin therings were saturated with water, weighted, dried for 24 hours at 105 °C and then again weighted to determine total pore volume and dry bulk density. The relative normalized density (RND) was estimated as the ratio of measured bulk density and a threshold value of bulk density (van den Akker and Hoogland, 2011). For sand and loamy soils (clay content < 16.7 %), this thresholdvalueis1.6gcm‐3 ;forsoilswithclaycontent>16.7%,thethresholdvalueis(1.75– 0.009*clay content). 3.2.4 Yield recordings and calculation Crop yields were recorded automatically during the harvesting of the wheat. The width of the harvesters was 5 m and the distance between yield recordings on‐the‐go were about 2 m. Recorded crop yields within circles around sampling points were averaged and then allocated to these soil sampling points. We used circles with a radius of 5 m and 10 m, to assess the uncertainty in allocation (Fig. 3.2). This allocation allowed us to relate spatial variations in crop yields to spatial variations in soil characteristics. 3.2.5 Data analysis Spatial distributions of crop yield and soil properties were displayed by ArcGis 10.2.1, using Inverse Distance Weighted (IDW) interpolation (Lloyd, 2005). Spatial dependence and spatial distribution coefficients of crop yield and soil properties were displayed by GS+ software, using the semi‐variogram method (Gamma Design Software, GS+9, 2008). The semi‐variogram is the basic geostatistical tool for measuring spatial autocorrelation of a regionalized variable (Hohn, 1998). This method describes the structure and randomness of spatial variables, and quantitatively describes the spatial distributions. First, all data per field were tested for normal distribution; data of most variables were not obedient to normal distributions (analyzed by the shapiro.test function of R studio (Kassambara, 2019). The data of these variables were then log‐natural transformed. Exponential, gaussian, spherical, and linear models were selected for the semi‐variograms. Three parameters were distinguished: the nugget variance (Co; i.e., the y‐intercept of the model; the sill (Co+C; i.e., the model asymptote; and the range (A; i.e., the distance over which spatial dependence is apparent (Robertson, 2008). The nugget ratio (Co/(Co+C)) indicates the spatial dependence, i.e., a variable is considered spatially dependent if the nugget ratio is <25% (Cambardella et al., 1994) .44 We established regression models on the basis of our hypotheses, using crop yields and potential N2O and CO2 emissions as response variables and a range of soil variables as explanatoryvariables.StatisticalanalyseswerecarriedoutbyRsoftware(RCoreTeam,2013). We used multiple linear regression models (function lm() in R) (James et al., 2013). Only explanatory indicators (regressors) that were sufficiently uncorrelated (r < 0.70) have been included in the selection process to avoid the problem of collinearity (Ott and Longnecker, 2010). In case of high correlations, one of the variables was selected for inclusion in the selection process and the other was rejected. To identify the best parameter combinations, thepercentageofvarianceaccountedfor(R2 adj;i.e.,adjustedforthenumberofparameters), the value of Mallows’ Cp (Ott and Longnecker, 2010), and the p value of the parameter estimateswereevaluated.TheselectedmodelswerebasedonthemarginalincreaseofR2 adj with increasing number of variables, a low Cp, and the significance of the parameters (p < 0.05). 3.3 Results and discussion 3.3.1 Mean soil characteristics of the four fields Soil bulk density varied within and between fields and tended to increase with soil depth (Fig. 3.3). Field A had the lowest bulk density, at all three depths, and fields B and D the highest bulk density, notably in the subsoil. Field B had a mean bulk density of 1.60±0.11 g cm‐3 at 30‐35 cm and field D had a mean bulk density of 1.58±0.10 g cm‐3 at 30‐35 cm. The mean RND at a depth of 30‐35 cm ranged from 0.86±0.05 for field A to 1.03±0.07 for field B, to 0.95±0.06 for field C and to 1.00±0.07 for field D (Tables S3.1, S3.2), indicating that mean subsoil bulk density in fields B and D is at a level where soil functioning may be impeded (van den Akker and Hoogland, 2011). This relates especially to root growth and drainage (Alaoui et al., 2011; Berisso et al., 2012; Czyz, 2004; Matthieu et al., 2011). The increasing soil bulk density with soil depth is likely the result of both a decreasing clay content (and increasing sand content) with depth and of the use of heavy machinery (for harvesting potatoes and sugar beet, and manure application). The manure applicators and crop harvesters have become heavier over time and do contribute to the densification of the subsoil (Keller et al., 2019b; Schjonning et al., 2015; van den Akker et al., 2013). A modelling study suggested that 43% of the agricultural land in the Netherlands has a compacted subsoil (Brus and Van Den Akker, 2018a), but confirmation by measurements is lacking. Especially clay soils are vulnerable to compaction when wet (Horn et al., 1995b).45 Soil penetration resistance increased with soil depth, notably below a depth of about 30 cm (Figs. S3.1, S3.2). Spatial variations in penetration resistance readings were relatively large (c.v. ranged from 23 to 76%, Table S3.1). Comparisons between fields are confounded by differences in soil moisture conditions between fields due to the time differences in measurements (days to weeks). Fig. 3.3 Box plots of soil bulk density measurements in the four fields (A, B, C, D) at three different depths. Boxes indicatethe upper (75%) and lower quartiles(25%) andthewhiskers indicate the5 and 95 percentiles. The line in the boxes indicate the median values. The unit of bulk density is g cm−3. Mean soil respiration (CO2 emissions) tended to decrease with depth in all fields. The c.v. of the mean potential CO2 emission was about three times larger in field A than in the other fields;thisisprobablyrelatedtotherelativelylargevariationinSOMcontentoffieldA(Table S3.1). Mean potential N2O emissions tended to increase with depth. The ratio of potential CO2 emissions to potential N2O emissions also decreased with depth; this was most notable in field A (Table S3.1). Incidental negative N2O emissions (apparent N2O reduction) occurred in samples from all four fields. Coefficients of variations were larger for the potential N2O and CO2 emissions than for bulk density, clay and SOM contents. Averagewheatyieldrangedfrom7.6±0.6to11.3±0.5Mgha‐1 in fieldAduring 2015to2019, and from 11.0±0.3 to 11.3±2.4 Mg ha‐1 in field B (Table S3.1). In field C, average wheat yield was 9.5±0.9 and 9.7±1.3 Mg ha‐1 in 2017 and 2019, respectively. Coefficients of variations were relatively small for wheat yield in all three fields and years. There were no spatial46 explicit yield recordings for other crops, and no spatial explicit wheat yield data were available for field D. 3.3.2 Spatial variations in soil characteristics and crop yields Within‐fieldspatialvariationswereobservedvisuallyinthemapsofsubsoilbulkdensity(Fig. 3.4), the wheat yield maps (Fig. S3.3), and in the maps of potential CO2 and N2O emissions of the top soil (Fig. S3.4). These spatial patterns seemed to be related partly to the spatial patterns in soil structure of the top soil (Fig. S3.5) and in the clay content (not shown). Fig. 3.4 Maps depicting the spatial variations of soil bulk density (g cm−3) at a depth of 30–35 cm of the four fields. Note that the scaling differs between fields. Results of semi‐variogram analyses of soil variables and wheat yields of the four fields are presented in Table 3.1. Exponential models gave the best fit for most variables (17 out of 50 soil characteristics examined for the four fields), followed by a spherical model (15), a gaussian model (14) and a linear model (4). The correlation coefficients (R2 ) of the models used were relatively high (range 0.52 to 0.97) for field A, modest (range 0.07‐0.97) for field B, low to modest for field C (range 0.01‐0.88)and low for field D(range 0.01‐0.26). Thepoor fitofthemodelsforfield Dmayberelatedtotheunusualnarrowshapeofthisfield,despite the fact that this field had a relatively small area (Fig. 3.1). We used a fixed number of 100 sampling points for all four fields, despite their different sizes and shapes, because we had no prior information about within‐field spatial variations. However, this number should not be considered as the optimum number of sampling points for all fields.47 Table 3.1 Semi‐variogram coefficients of soil properties and cereal yields of four fields. Note that emissions of CO2 and N2O are potential CO2 and N2O emissions (see text). †)SOMcontent,g/kg;claycontent,%;soil(BD)bulkdensity,g/cm3;N2OandCO2 emissions,mg/m2/d;wheat yield, Mg/ha48 Thenuggeteffectwassmallinmostcases(Table3.1),indicatingthatthesmall‐scalevariance was relatively small and that the sampling design was adequate to measure the spatial variability of the studied variables (Bogunovic et al., 2017). The nugget‐to‐sill ratio (Co/(Co+C)) was low (<25%) for most variables, indicating that the variations in these variables were spatially dependent (Cambardella et al., 1994). Variations in soil bulk density were spatially strongly dependent at all three depths, apart from field A (at depth of 30‐35 and 50‐55 cm) and field B (at depth of 50‐55 cm). Within‐field variations in clay and SOM contents of the topsoil were also spatially strongly dependent, apart from the clay content in field D. Within‐field variations in wheat yield in fields A, B and C were also spatially depended,forallyears(Table3.1).ThesameappliestothepotentialCO2 andN2Oemissions during the incubation ofsoil samples; the within‐field variations in theemissions of CO2 and N2Owerespatiallydependedatallthreedepth,apartfromthreecases(twoforCO2 andone for N2O emissions). The range (A in Table 3.1) of the spatially dependent variance tended to be smaller for soil bulk density than for clay and SOM contents. It was mostly <50 m for soil bulk density in fields B, D and C. The semi‐variograms of potential CO2 and N2O emissions also showed a relatively small range. No attempts were made to estimate values in points at which no samples have been taken through ordinary kriging (Lipiec and Usowicz, 2018), as small ranges make spatially explicit management complicated. Wheat yields had a relatively strong spatial dependency with a range of 137 to 773 m, suggesting that some of this variation may be addressed possibly by precision management. Within‐field variations in cropyieldmaybecausedby spatial variations insoil water andsoil nutrientdelivery tothecrop,spatial variations in theincidenceofweeds,pest anddiseases, and to spatial variations in soil and crop management practices (e.g. planting density, fertilization, crop protection) (Basso et al., 2019; Maestrini and Basso, 2018; Taylor et al., 2003). Extractable nutrients (N, P, K, Mg, Cu, Zn, Se) were spatially dependent in a number of cases, with ranges varying from 12 to 1800 m (Table S3.3). Extractable P and K were relatively low in field B (Fig. S3.1), but step‐wise multiple regression analyses indicated that there were no statistically significant correlations between the spatial variation of extractable P and K and spatial variations in wheat yields (not shown). We infer that it is unlikely that extractable (micro)nutrients were wheat yield limiting, although the level of some nutrients tended to be below recommended levels (Fig. S3.6, Table S3.4). We cannot exclude that spatial variations in available soil water and in the incidence of weeds and diseaseshavecontributionstospatialvariationsinwheatyield.Insummer,wheatrootsmay tap from shallow groundwater, which enters the root zone through capillary rise. This is one of the reasons for the rather stable wheat yields observed during 2015‐2019, next to the49 good management by the farmers; the relatively low yield of Field A in 2016 was related to late sowing of summer wheat. Spatial variations in soil bulk density may also contribute to spatial variations in crop yield, notably through its effect on root growth and the delivery of soil water and nutrients. Precisionagricultureaimsataddressingspatialvariationsinsoilandcropperformances,and thereby may contribute to increasing yield and resource use efficiency. Precision management relies on accurate measurements and spatially distinct areas that are sufficiently large to be managed (Diacono et al., 2013; Field et al., 2017). Spatial dependencies with a (very) short range and/or low stability over years are difficult to address. Application of precision management may be limited also by the often diffuse relationships between soil characteristics and crop yields, which makes inferences about spatial variations unreliable, and by the lack of appropriate tools to communicate between precision management techniques (Kempenaar et al., 2020). 3.3.3 Relationships between crop yield and soil properties Multiple linear regression analyses indicated that spatial variations in wheat yield of field A were related to spatial variations in soil clay content, bulk density, and penetration resistance at 30‐35 cm in 2015 and 2016 (P<0.05), but not in 2018 and 2019 (Table 3.2). These relationships may reflect a relationship between yield and soil water delivery to the crop (Libohova et al., 2018). Spatial variations in CaCl2‐extractable Mg content were related to spatial variations in wheat yield (P<0.001) in Field A in 2018, but we doubt whether this is a causal relationship (Table 3.2). No statistically significant relationships between within‐ field spatial variations in wheat yield and within‐field spatial variations in soil characteristics were found forfield A in2019(P>0.05, Table3.2).Spatial variations in wheat yieldwere also significantly related to spatial variations in soil clay content in field B in 2015, but no significant relationshipswerefound in2016.However,spatialvariationsin wheatyieldwere not significantly related to spatial variations in soil bulk density or penetration resistance in field B, while it had a relatively high subsoil bulk density and a Relative Normalized Density above 1 (Tables 3.2, S3.2). Further, spatial variations in crop yield in field C were not significantly related to spatial variations in soil properties (Table 3.2). Evidently, the relationshipsbetweenspatialvariationsin cropyieldandsoilcharacteristicswerenotstable overyears,likelybecauseofinteractionsasaresultofdifferencesbetweenyearsin weather conditions. As a consequence, it will be difficult to address the spatial variations adequately through precision agriculture technology.50 Table 3.2 Coefficients (means ± standard deviations)of the multiple regression relationships betweenwheat yield and soil characteristics of fields A, B and C. Correlations coefficients (R2) and degree of freedom (DF) are presented at the bottom of each block. †) Multiple linear regression models (function lm() in R, James et al., 2013). The same as below. ††) Total N and SOM contents, g/kg; clay content, %; available Mg, mg/kg; soil (BD) bulk density, g/cm3; penetration resistance (PR), kPa. The same as below. †††) “*” means 0.01<P<0.05, “**” means 0.001<P<0.01, “***” means P<0.001. The same as below. Fewstudieshaverelatedspatialvariationsinsubsoilbulkdensitytospatialvariationsincrop yield, mainly because subsoil bulk density and spatial variations in subsoil bulk density cannot be measured easily (Horn et al., 1995b; Keller et al., 2017). Bölenius et al. (2018) found significant relationships between spatial variations in penetration resistance and spatial variations in crop yields, but these were strongly dependent on season and weather conditions. They concluded that single measurements of penetration resistance were insufficient to identify yield variations, apart from dry years. Usowicz and Lipiec (2017) found statistically significant negative relationships between spatial variations in cereal yields and spatial variations in top soil (0‐10 cm) bulk density of a 1 ha large experimental field. The spatial dependence was strong and the range varied from 12 to 99 m between years (repeated measurements in the same field). However, subsoil compaction (or bulk density) was not measured. Usowicz and Lipiec (2017) found no statistically significant51 relationships between spatial variations in cereal yields and spatial variations in top soil (0‐ 10 cm) bulk density of a 2.4 ha large farmers’ field. Again, subsoil bulk density was not measured. Further, spatial variations in topsoil (0‐20 cm) bulk density were negatively related to spatial variations in saturated hydraulic conductivity of soils at regional scale (140 km2 ), while variations in bulk density were relatively small and only weakly spatial dependent (Usowicz and Lipiec, 2021).These studies clearly indicate that soil bulk density may be an important crop‐yield influencing factor, but that data and information about the relationshipsbetweenvariationsinsubsoilbulkdensityandcropyieldareoftenconfounded

3.3.4 Relationships between soil bulk density and potential CO2 and N2O emissions SoilCO2 respirationreflectssoilbiologicalactivity(Avidanoetal.,2005);itisprimarilyrelated to the amounts of metabolizable organic matter, temperature and soil aeration. Soil N2O emission reflects the balance between N2O production and consumption by micro‐ organisms in soil, and is related to the concentrations of ammonium (NH4 + ), nitrate (NO3 ‐ ) and metabolizable organic matter, as well as to temperature and soil aeration (Bange, 2000; Kool et al., 2010; Wrage‐Monnig et al., 2018). We hypothesized that spatial variations in potentialCO2 andN2Oemissionswererelatedtospatialvariationsinsoilbulkdensity,assoil bulk density affects soil aeration. Indeed, within‐field variations in potential CO2 emissions were often significantly related to within‐field variations in soil bulk density in the subsoil at 30‐35 cm in all four fields, and in two fields also at depth of 50‐55 cm (Table 3.3). Also, variations in potential N2O emissions were significantly related to variations in soil bulk density of the top soil in fields A and B and to variations in bulk density in the subsoil at depth of 30‐35 cm in field A, and 50‐55 cm of fields A and D (Table 3.3). Spatial variations in potential CO2 and N2O emissions were not related to spatial variations in the SOM content of the topsoil in any of the four fields. Commonly, an increase in soil bulk density decreases CO2 emissions and increases N2O emissions (Bessou et al., 2010; Ruser et al., 2006; Sitaula et al., 2000; van Groenigen et al., 2005). Increases in soil bulk density decrease soil porosity and aeration, and thereby decrease soil respiration but increase N2O production (or reduce N2O diffusion and N2O consumption rates). Changes in the ratio of soil CO2 and N2O emissions in response to changes in soil bulk density may thus provide insight into differential perturbations of soil C and N transformations. Frequency distributions of potential CO2 and N2O emissions were highly skewed in all fields, and therefore logarithmic values were used. The ratio of log CO2 emissions to log N2O emissions tended to decrease with an increase in soil bulk density,52 especially in field B (Fig. 3.5), the field with the highest mean bulk density and also with the highest coefficient of variation of the mean bulk density (Table S3.1). This indicates that potential N2O emissions increased relative to potential CO2 emissions with increasing bulk density.Further,theratiooflog CO2 emissionstolog N2O emissionsstrongly decreasedwith bulk density following N application (Fig.3.5). Emissions ofN2O in the topsoil (5‐10cm)and sub soil (30‐35 cm) increased by a factor of 2 to 5 following addition of NaNO3, suggesting that the N2O emissions were in part nitrate limited. Evidently, increases in N2O emissions following N fertilization were much greater in soil with high bulk density than in soil with low bulk density. Note that the increased N2O emissions in the top soil (0‐5 cm) vanished after 6 days and that the peak in the subsoil at 30‐35 cm occurred much later than in the topsoil.NoincreasesinN2OemissionsoccurredfollowingNapplication tothesubsoilat50‐ 55 cm during the six‐days measuring period (Fig. 3.5). Our results provide further evidence that the current trend of increasing wheel loads in modern agriculture, which increase (sub)soilbulkdensity, may increaseN2O emissions from soil and especially also from the subsoil (Shcherbak and Robertson, 2019). Agriculture is a main source of greenhouse emissions and N2O emissions form a significant fraction of the total GHG emissions from agriculture. Spatial variations in soil bulk density are likely also an important explanatory factor for the large spatial variations in N2O emissions observed in the current study (Table S3.1) and in other studies (Robertson and Groffman, 2015).53 Table 3.3 Coefficients (means ± standard deviations) of the multiple regression relationships between potential N2O emissions, potential CO2 emissions and soil characteristics at depth of 5–10, 30–35, and 50– 55 cm of the four fields. Correlations coefficients (R2) and degree of freedom (DF) are presented at the bottom of each block.54 Fig.3.5Relationshipsbetweensoilbulkdensity(gcm−3)andtheratioofpotentialCO2emissionsandpotential N2O emissions (mg m−2 d‐1; log scale) for field B at three different depth intervals and at four different moments in time.55 3.4 Conclusions Our initial hypotheses were only partly proven. We found significant variations in subsoil bulk density, which were spatially dependent, but the level of soil compaction appeared to be nowhere severe in the four fields. Further, within‐field spatial variations in subsoil bulk density were related to within‐field spatial variations in the potential emissions of CO2 and N2O, but not to variations in wheat yield. Our random sampling approach yielded unbiased estimates of the spatial variations in subsoilbulkdensityandothersoilpropertieswithin fourfields, which weregreatlydifferent in shapeandsize.Mostofthesevariationswerestrongly spatially dependentbuttheranges were often relatively small, indicating that the scope for identifying distinctly different and manageable units was relatively small. Yet, semi‐variograms proved to be an effective method to characterize spatial variations in both soil properties, soil processes and crop yields. The mean bulk density of the subsoil in two fields was close to the suggested threshold of wherebulkdensityaffectssoilfunctioning.Indeed,potentialemissionsofCO2 andN2Owere significantly related to soil bulk density. The ratio of CO2 emissions to N2O emissions was negatively related to bulk density in both topsoil and subsoil, especially following N application, indicating that emissions of N2O increased with an increase in soil bulk density. More studies are needed to find out how stable these relationships are over years, and how precision agriculture may address these relationships. Spatial variations in wheat yield were only marginally related to soil properties. No statistically significant relationships were found between within‐field spatial variations in (sub)soil bulk density and within‐field spatial variations in wheat yield in any of the 8 field x year combinations analyzed. Variations in wheat yield were spatially dependent, and the ranges were on average larger than the ranges of soil properties, suggesting that spatial variations in wheat yield were mainly caused by other (management) factors. The near absence of a relationship between within‐field variations in soil properties and within‐field variations in wheat yield is likely also related to the fact that the within‐field variations in soil properties were relatively small, that wheat is not a very sensitive crop to subsoil compaction, and that crop growth conditions are relatively good in the study area. The farmers were not surprised by the findings of relatively high soil bulk density values in some fields, which they ascribed to effects of heavy harvesters and manure applicators. Increasingly, they use GPS‐controlled trafficking to minimize the area and extent of soil56 compaction, as they are aware that there are as yet no easy‐to‐implement remediation measures for spatial variations in subsoil compaction. Our study provides evidence that potential N2O emissions (and the ratio of potential CO2 emissions to potential N2O emissions) is a more sensitive indicator for the effect of soil bulk density on soil functioning than wheat yield. The linear relationship between bulk density andtheratioof CO2 emissions to N2O emissionswasapparent in both topsoil (5‐10cm)and subsoil(30‐35cm).Thislinearrelationshipalsosuggeststhattherewasnospecificthreshold forsoilbulkdensity beyondwhich emissionschangedramatically;insteademissionschange gradually with an increase in bulk density. Our results provide also evidence that an increasing soil compaction in modern agriculture contributes to increases in N2O emissions from agricultural land and that these increases in emissions may emerge from the top soil as well as the subsoil. Future studies should consider N2O emission factors as function of N fertilizers and (sub)soil bulk density. Acknowledgement: This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 677407 (SoilCare project), and from China Scholarship Council (File No. 201408130093). We gratefully acknowledge the support from the farmers in the project H‐Wodka, and from Eurofins‐Agro.5758 Table S3.2 Mean and median values and standard deviations (sd) of the Relative Normalized Density (RND) and of the relative porosity of four fields for three depth intervals. RND Relative porosity

RND = actual soil bulk density / threshold bulk density; threshold bulk density= 1.6 g/cm3, when clay content is < 16.7%; threshold bulk density= 1.75 ‐ 0.009 * clay content, when clay content > 16.7%. Relative porosity = actual soil porosity / threshold porosity. Threshold porosity = 0.4.59 Table S3.3 Semi‐variogram coefficients of 0.01 M CaCL2 extractable soil nutrients of the four fields. †) Normality tests were made before data analysis. Variables without normal distributions were log‐natural transformed first. Results of Se and Mg in field A, B and D had normal distributions; other variables were all log‐natural transformed before semi‐variogram analyses. ††)ZncontentinfieldCwasatthesameleveleverywhereinfieldC,becauseofitwasbelowdetectablelevel. †††) Units: CaCl2‐extractable N, mg kg‐1; CaCl2‐extractable P: mg kg‐1; CaCl2‐extractable K: mg kg‐1;

CaCl2‐extractable Zn: μg kg‐1; CaCl2‐extractable Se: μg kg‐160 Table S3.4 Recommended range of soil nutrient test levels (Source: Eurofins Agro).61 †) Units: Soil total N: g kg‐1; CaCl2‐extractable P: mg kg‐1; CaCl2‐extractable K: mg kg‐1 SOM: %; CaCl2‐extractable N: mg kg‐1; Penetration resistance: kPa Fig. S3.1 Boxplots of soil characteristics in four fields (A, B, C, D). Boxes indicate the upper (75%) and lower quartiles (25%) and the whiskers indicate the 5 and 95 percentiles. The line in the boxes indicate the median values. SOM and total N were determined by NIRS, 0.01 M CaCl2‐extractable N (NH4 + + NO3 ‐), P and K by segmented flow analysis. Based on 100 samples per field.62 Fig.S3.2Soilpenetrationresistanceasfunctionofsoildepthinfourfields.Eachlineshowstheaveragevalues of three recordings at one sampling site in the fields. In total, there were 100 sampling sites per field.63 Fig. S3.3 Maps showing the spatial distributions of crop yield in fields A, B and C in different years (units: Mg ha‐1). Spatial variations in wheat yields were displayed by ArcGIS, based on the Inverse distance weighted interpolation method (Lloyd, 2005). Note that the scaling differs between fields.64 Legend Soil size Soil shape Soil structure 1. fine (<0.5mm) 1. granular 1. structureless 2. medium (0.5~2mm) 2. blocky 2. weak structure 3. coarse (2~5mm) 3. prismatic, columnar 3. moderate structure 4. very coarse (>5mm) 4. platy 4. strong structure Fig. S3.4 Maps showing the spatial variations of the soil structure assessments of the top soil (0‐5 cm) of fields A and B, in terms of (i) structure, (ii) shape of the soil aggregates, and (ii) size of the soil aggregates. Seelegendatthebottomofthefigure.Basedon100assessmentsperfield.Spatialvariationsweredisplayed by ArcGIS, based on the Inverse distance weighted interpolation method (Lloyd, 2005).65 a. CO2 emission (5‐10 cm, mg m‐2 d‐1) b. N2O emission (5‐10 cm, mg m‐2 d‐1) Fig. S3.5 Maps showing the spatial variations of soil respiration (CO2 emission; upper four panels) and N2O emission (lower four panels) in the top soil (5‐10 cm) of four fields (A, B, C and D) measured following soil incubations. Spatial variations were displayed by ArcGIS, based on the Inverse distance weighted interpolation method (Lloyd, 2005). Note that the scaling differs between fields.66 Fig.S3.6Frequency distributionsof0.01MCaCl2 extractable(micro)nutrientsinthetopsoil (0‐20cm)offour fields(A,B,CandD).Basedon100samplesperfield.Recommendationrangesareindicatedbythebluebars.6768 Units:

CaCl2‐extractable Mg: mg kg‐169 4. Responses of cereal yields and soil carbon sequestration to four long‐term tillage practices in the North China Plain Current tillage practices in the important winter wheat–summer maize double cropping systemoftheNorthChinaPlainareunderdebatebecauseofnegativeeffectsonsoilquality and crop yield. Therefore, a long‐term experiment was conducted from 2001 to 2018 to determine the effects of soil conservation practices on crop yield and soil quality. The treatments were imposed following maize harvest and prior wheat seeding, and were defined as follows: (1) moldboard ploughing (0–20 cm) following maize straw removal (CK); (2) moldboard ploughing (0–20 cm) following maize straw return (CT); (3) rotary tillage following maize straw return (RT); and (4) no tillage with maize straw covering the soil surface (NT). Wheat straw was chopped and spread on the soil in all treatments and maize seeded without prior tillage. Wheat yields were higher in CT than RT and NT treatments (p < 0.05); NT had 18% lower wheat yields than CT. No significant differences were found between treatments in summer maize yields. The soil organic carbon (SOC) content in the surface layer (0–5 cm) was higher in NT and RT compared to CT and CK. However, SOC content in the 10–20 cm and 20–30 cm layers were lower in NT and RT compared to CT and CK. Similarly, available phosphorus in the surface soil was higher in NTandRTthaninCTandCK.buttheoppositewastrueforthelowersoillayers.SOCstocks (0–30 cm) increased in all treatments, and were initially faster in NT and RT than in CT and CK. However, SOC stocks were higher in CT than in other treatments at the end of the experiment. This finding indicates that no tillage and reduced tillage decreased both wheat yields and soil C sequestration over time; it also indicates that CT was the most robust in terms of crop yields and soil C sequestration. Based on: Chen, S., Yang, P., Zhang, Y., Dong, W., Hu, C., & Oenema, O. (2022). Responses of cereal yields and soil carbon sequestration to four long‐term tillage practices in the North China plain. Agronomy, 12(1), 176.70 4.1 Introduction Soil tillage is conducted for several purposes: to prepare a seedbed for the next crop, to incorporate crop residues and fertilizers into the soil, to suppress weeds and to improve the bio‐physical structure of the soil (Li et al., 2020). However, conventional tillage practices are under debate because of the increased soil organic matter decomposition and associated declines in soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks, soil biota and soil biodiversity (Aguilera et al., 2013; Madejón et al., 2009). Tillage practices are also implicated in risks of subsoil compaction (plough pan) and soil erosion (Busari et al., 2015). Conservation tillageisdefinedasafield managementapproach thatminimizestheintensity and frequency of tillage operations so as to achieve agronomic and environmental benefits, including an improvement in soil bulk density, soil aggregate stability, water use efficiency, andnutrientutilization(Chimsahetal.,2020).Indeed,conservationtillagemayexertseveral beneficial effects, including a lower fossil energy use, greater SOC sequestration, and less soil compaction, erosion, and run‐off (Gathala et al., 2015; Nouri et al., 2019; Piazza et al., 2020). Soil conservation includes different variants, including no tillage (NT) and reduced tillage (RT) or minimum tillage (MT), and these tillage practices can be combined, or not combined as the case may be, with crop residue mulching on the soil surface, crop rotation, cover cropping, and integrated pest and weed control practices. As a result, there is often a diversity in outcomes of soil conservation practices. For example, a meta‐analysis of more than 600 field studies found that crop yields were significantly lower under no tillage compared to conventional till, when not combined with crop rotations and crop residue mulching (Pittelkow et al., 2015a). Yet, other studies found higher yields (Büchi et al., 2017; Pengetal.,2020),economicbenefits(Kumaraetal.,2020)andimprovementsinsoilphysical properties (Li et al., 2019b) under no till. No tillage appears to be less appropriate for continuouswheatcomparedtowheatinrotationwith,forexample,legumes(Macholdtand Honermeier, 2017). Further, the effects of conservation tillage on crop yields strongly depend on soil quality and climatic conditions (Lampurlanés et al., 2001). Conservation tillage had positive effects on crop yields in arid regions under rainfed conditions (Su et al., 2007; Taner et al., 2015). Conversely, conventional tillage gave higher yields than conservation tillage in humid climates and under irrigation (Martínez et al., 2008; Pittelkow et al., 2015a). Thus far, there has not been an agreement on crop yield changes under conservation tillage. Soil organic carbon (SOC) is the largest carbon pool in terrestrial ecosystem, and plays an essential role in supporting soil biodiversity and biological activity, nutrient cycling, as well as regulating climate change (Stockmann et al., 2013). Conservation tillage was also71 promoted as an effective practice for increasing SOC (Blanco‐Canqui and Lal, 2008; Ussiri and Lal, 2009). However, some studies found that there were no significant differences in SOC storage between no tillage and conventional tillage, when differences in the depth distributionofSOCandsoilbulkdensityareaccountedfor(Luoetal.,2010;Ogleetal.,2019). TheSOCbalanceisdeterminedbytheinputsoforganicCintothesoil(throughcropresidues, straw, stubble, roots and root exudates) and the outputs from the soil (through decomposition of organic matter, erosion and leaching of dissolved organic C) (Pedrotti et al., 2019). Soil tillage and crop residue management practices directly affect the balance betweenorganicCinputsandoutputs.InputsoforganicCdependoncroptypeandrotation, crop residue management, and tillage. The leaching of dissolved organic C is also a soil C loss pathway, but is negligible in most common systems and field conditions (Dong et al., 2009), except for situations with high rainfall or excessive irrigation, peat soils and/or with high inputs of highly soluble C substrates (Qin et al., 2017). The North China Plain covers an area of 35 million ha and has a population of 130 million people. It is one of the most intensively cultivated regions in China (Du et al., 2010). Approximately70%ofthecultivatedlandhasadoublecroppingsystemofwinterwheatand summer maize, with a no tillage and moldboard ploughing combination (Liu et al., 2016). Moldboard ploughing is commonly applied to a depth of ~20 cm. Recently, rotary tillage to adepthof~10cmhasalsobecomecommonpractice.Untilthe2000s,strawwaseitherused as animal feed and biofuel, or burned in the field. However, straw burning has been prohibited since 1990s (because of the smog); concentrates replaced straw as animal feed, while the increasingly used mechanization facilitated combine harvesting and straw choppingandreturntothesoil.Asaconsequence,thetillageandcropresiduemanagement changed. However, these practices increased the soil bulk density below 20 cm and created unfavorable growing conditions for wheat roots (Zhang et al., 2012). Hence, there is a continued search for improved tillage and straw management practices. The main objective of this study is to determine the long‐term effects of tillage and straw management practices on crop yield and soil C and nutrient accumulation in the winter wheat–summer maize double cropping system. We hypothesized that (1) replacing moldboard ploughing after the maize harvest by no tillage or rotary tillage may affect soil C sequestration, soil fertility, and thereby the crop yield in the long term, and that (2) removing maize straw from the field would not affect soil C sequestration much compared to maize straw return, because of the relatively large return of organic C via wheat straw, and the limited capacity of the soil to sequester C. We assumed that most SOC changes occurred in the 0–30 cm soil layer, because most of the roots of wheat and maize are in this layer and soil tillage and management practices mainly affect this layer (Drosos et al., 2020;72 Du et al., 2010). Hence, soil sampling was limited to the top 30 cm of soil. 4.2. Materials and methods 4.2.1. Experimental site The long‐term experiment was conducted from October 2001 to June 2018 at the Luancheng Agroecosystem Experimental Station (37°53′N, 114°40′E; elevation 50 m) (Fig. S4.3), which is located on the piedmont of the Taihang Mountains on the North China Plain. The Luancheng experimental station is one of the stations of the China National Ecosystem Observation and Research Network and the Global Terrestrial Observation System. The experimenthadacommonandcontinuousdoublecroppingsystemrotationofwinterwheat (Triticum aestivum L.) and summer maize (Zea mays L.). Each year in early June, the winter wheat is harvested and maize is planted; while in early October maize is harvested and winter wheat is planted. There is no fallow period. The soil is a sandy loam and classified as entisol, with a clay content of 14% (Staff, 2014). The mean initial soil bulk density of the 0– 20 cm layer was 1.53 g/cm3 , and the SOC content was 0.90 g/kg. 4.2.2 Experimental design and field management In 2001, three tillage and crop residue management treatments were implemented: the conventionalpracticeofmoldboardplowing,rotarytillage(RT),andnotillage(NT)following the maize harvests. In 2004, the moldboard plowing plot was split into two subplots with different residue management strategies: half of the plot had chopped maize straw incorporation into the tillage layer (CT) and the other half had the maize straw removed (CK). A summary of the tillage and crop residue management practices of the four treatmentsispresentedin Table4.1.Therewerethreereplicationsforeachtreatment.Plot size was 560 m2

At winter wheat harvest, wheat straw was mechanically chopped and evenly distributed on the soil surface as mulching material in all four treatments (common practice). At maize harvest, all straw was chopped and incorporated into the soil during tillage (common practice), except for the NT treatment where the straw was chopped and spread on thesoil surface, and for the CK treatment where the straw was removed. The fertilization and irrigation practices were identical in all four treatments and for both crops. Only urea and diammonium hydrogen phosphate (DAP) were applied. Before winter wheatsowing,thefertilizersweredisseminated atarateof130kgha−1 ofNand121kgha−1 of P. However, DAP and urea were applied in bands at a depth of 5 cm in the seeding row73 of the NT treatment. In addition, both wheat and maize received 138 kg ha−1 of N as urea, shortlyafterjointingthroughtopdressing.Allplotsreceivedirrigationatsowing.Depending on rainfall andsoil moisture condition, an additional threeor fourirrigations for wheat,and two or three irrigations for maize, were applied using a sprinkler system. Irrigation was applied when the soil moisture in the root zone declined to 60–65% of the field capacity. Generally, 40‐50 mm water was applied in each irrigation. Table 4.1 Annual tillage and crop residue management practices per treatment *. CK CT RT NT Tillage Before Wheat Moldboard ploughing, tillage depth of 20 cm Moldboard plough, tillage depth of 20 cm Rotary tillage, tillage depth of 10 cm No tillage Tillage Before Maize No tillage No tillage No tillage No tillage Wheat Seeding Pattern 15 cm between rows, 3–5 cm seeding depth The same as CK The same as CK 20 cm between rows, 10 cm inner row, 5 cm seeding depth Maize Straw Management Maize straw removed, root and stubble incorporated in the soil Maize straw chopped (5–10 cm) and incorporated in the soil The same as CT Maize straw chopped (5–10 cm) and spread on the soil surface Wheat Straw Management Wheat straw chopped (5–10 cm) and spread on soil surface The same as CK The same as CK The same as CK * Rotary tillage has become common practice in North China Plain in recent years; the soil (0–10 cm) is broken into pieces through blades or teeth attached to the disks of a rotating drum. 4.2.3 Data collection and monitoring 4.2.3.1 Grain yield Wheat grain yields were measured in 3 m2 plots following harvesting and threshing (with a thresher). After harvesting, the straw was chopped and returned to the field. Maize grain yields were measured in 10 m2 plots; Plants were manually cut down 10 cm above the soil surface, dried and weighted at harvest time, while the ears from the plants were manually harvested and threshed. Grains were air‐dried to a moisture content of 13%, and their weights were recorded to obtain the final grain yields. The yield of each plot was calculated as the equivalent yield of the whole field, by the unit of t ha−1 . 4.2.3.2 Soil sampling and analyses SoilsampleswerecollectedafterwinterwheatharvestinJuneeveryotheryear.Soilsamples were taken by stainless steel rings of 100 cm3 , at the depths of 0–5, 5–10, 10–20, and 20– 30 cm, using the same auger hole. The rings with soil samples were transported within 5 h74 to a temperature‐conditioned room (4 °C) and stored until further analysis. Content of soil organic carbon (SOC) was measured by dichromate oxidation and subsequent titration with ferrous ammonium sulfate (Yeomans and Bremner, 1988). Available soil P was measured by the hydrochloric acid–ammonium fluoride extraction/ molybdenum antimony colorimetry method (P‐Olsen); available soil K was measured by ammonium acetate extraction and flame photometry (K‐exch); and available N in soil was measured by the alkali hydrolysis diffusion method (Sparks et al., 2020). Soil bulk density was measured by the core method (ASAE standard, 1984). 4.2.3.3 Carbon input via straw return The total carbon (C) input to the soil via straw return was calculated as: C input = grain yield * HI * C contents of straw Where HI is the harvest index; these values were determined for maize and wheat in 2005,

wheat were0.50,0.48, 0.47,and0.47, respectively. The HIvalues for maize were 0.48, 0.47,

1 ) and 0.421 (g·kg‐1 ), respectively, as derived from literature (Chen et al., 2020). 4.2.3.4 Weather data Daily weather data were obtained from a standard weather station, at approximately 50 m from the experimental site, and included the daily mean temperature, minimum temperature, daylight hours, and rainfall. 4.2.4. Statistical analysis All data collected were statistically analyzed using ANOVA to test differences among treatments in crop yield, OM, SOC, AN, AP and AK. The means of the treatments were compared using Fisher’s LSD method at the 0.05 probability level. All analyses were conducted using SPSS statistical software (version 11.0, SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). All figures were performed with R studio (version 3.2.1) and Office 2010. 4.3. Results 4.3.1 Climatic conditions Themeantemperaturewas7.9°Cduringthewheatand24.5°Cduringthemaizeseason(Fig. S4.1).Theaverageannualrainfallwas413mm,with60to80%during themaizeseasonand 20 to 40% during the wheat season. The highest annual rainfall was 569 mm in 2008 and thelowestwas234mmin2016.Theperiodfrom2014to2018wasrelativelydryandwarm.75 Table 4.2 Annual wheat and maize grain yields (means ± s.d.) and mass of carbon (C) in aboveground residues returned to the soil (means ± s.d.) in a double cropping system with four tillage treatments during the period 2005–2018. The results of the statistical analyses are presented in the lower half of Table. See Table 4.1 for the tillage treatments. Treatments Wheat Yield * t ha−1 a−1 Maize Yield * t ha−1 a−1 Returned Residues * t C ha−1 a−1

F P F P F P ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

* Different letters in the same column indicate significant differences at p< 0.05. Fig. 4.1 Grain yields of winter wheat and summer maize in a double cropping system with four tillage treatmentsduringtheperiod2004to2018(means±standarddeviations;barsrepresentstandarddeviations of the mean of six replicates). Colored lines between means are only meant to make differences between treatments more clear. See Table 4.1 for the tillage treatments.76 4.3.2 Wheat and maize yields From 2005 to 2018, grain yields for winter wheat ranged between 4 and 8 Mg ha−1 , while grain yields for summer maize ranged between 5 and 10 Mg ha−1 (Fig. 4.1). The yield of winter wheat was significantly affected by tillage treatment and the experimental year. In addition, there was a significant interaction between Tillage and Year (Table 4.2). There were no significant trends in yield over time. Mean wheat yields were significantly higher in the CK, CT and RT treatments than in the NT treatment (p < 0.05, Table 4.2). Furthermore, mean wheat yield was higher in CT than in RT (p < 0.05, Table 4.2). There were no significant differences between CK and CT, indicating that maize straw removal/return had no effect on wheat yield (Fig. 4.1). Mean maize yields did not differ between treatments (p > 0.05, Table 4.2). Differences between treatments in mean yields were ≤0.3 Mg ha−1 . 4.3.3 Total carbon input from straw return The annual C input via straw return roughly ranged between 2.5 and 3.0 Mg ha−1 for the CT, RT and NT treatments, and between 1.0 and 1.5 Mg ha−1 for the CK treatment (Fig. 4.2). The mean annual C input at the CK treatment (1.25 Mg ha−1 ) was significantly lower than at the other three treatments (p < 0.001, Table 4.2), while the mean annual C input at the CT treatment (2.83 Mg ha−1 ) was significantly higher than those at the other three treatments (p < 0.05). There were no significant differences between RT and NT treatments.

Soil organic C (SOC) content increased in all treatments and all soil layers during the experimental period (Fig. 4.3). The mean SOC content decreased with depth and the rate of increase also decreased with depth. In the surface layer (0–5 cm), SOC content of NT treatment increased by 34% between 2005 and 2012, and then remained more or less constant at a level of 1.45 g kg−1 (Fig. 4.3). Note, that some differences in SOC content of the surface soil layer were already induced during the years 2001–2005, especially in the RT and NT treatments. Stocks of SOC in the0–30 cmsoil layer increased rapidly from 2004 to 2012,Thereafter,the rateofincreasesloweddowninalltreatments(Fig.4.4).TheCTtreatmenthadhigherlevels of SOC stocks than the other three treatments from 2008 onwards, and reached 50 t/ha in 2018 (Table 4.3). The NT treatment had the highest C sequestration rate (0.99 kg ha−1 a−1 ) during thefirst years (2001–2006),followed by the RTtreatment (0.94 kgha−1 a−1 ), whileCT treatment had the lowest C sequestration rate (0.56 kg ha−1 a−1 ). However, the C77 sequestration rate continued to increase in the CT treatment, while the C sequestration in the RT and NT treatment slowed down during the period 2006 and 2018. As a result, the mean C sequestration rate was much higher in CT treatment (0.69 kg ha−1 a−1 ) than in the RT and NT treatments (0.49 and 0.36 kg ha−1 a−1 , respectively) between 2001 and 2018 (Table 4.3). The CK treatment had the lowest mean C sequestration rate (0.25 kg ha−1 a−1 ). Fig. 4.2 Organic carbon input (t/ha) into the soil from aboveground residues of winter wheat and summer maize in a double cropping system with four tillage treatments during the period 2004 to 2018. Bars represent standard deviations of the mean of six replicates. See Table 4.1 for the tillage treatments. 4.3.5 Available soil nutrients The available soil N (AN) remained more or less constant during the experimental period and did not differ much between treatments (Fig. 4.5a). It decreased slightly with depth. TheRTandNTtreatmentstendedtohavethehighestANcontentatadepthof0‐5cmdepth, and the lowest AN content at a depth of 20‐30 cm, compared to the CK and CT treatments. The available soil P (P‐Olsen) exhibited large inter‐annual fluctuations, especially in the top 5 cm of the soil, but showed no clear trends over time; it decreased with increasing depth. Thetreatments,RTandCK,tendedtohavethehighestAPcontentatadepthof0–5cm(Fig. 4.5b). The available soil K (K‐exch) also displayed relatively large inter‐annual fluctuations, but without clear trends over time. AK decreased with increasing depth. There were no clear differences between treatments in AK (Fig. 4.5c). The ratios (wt/wt) of AN, AP and AK displayed some clear patterns (Fig. S4.2). The mean ratioofAP/ANstronglydecreasedwithincreasingdepth,suggestingarelativeaccumulation78 of P in the topsoil. The ratio of AK/AN was within a narrow range of 0.8 to 1.0 for all four depths, suggesting a similar availability and mobility of N and K. The ratios of AP/AN were relatively low in NT. Conversely, the ratios ofAK/AP were relatively high in NT andlow in CK and CT. This isthe opposite to our expectations, as it suggests no preferential accumulation of P in the surface soil of NT (no tillage). Fig. 4.3 Soil organic carbon content (SOC, g kg−1) of the 0–5 cm (a), 5–10 cm (b), 10–20 cm (c), and 20–30 cm (d) soil layers in a double cropping system with four tillage treatments, during the period 2004 to 2018 (means ± standard deviations; bars represent standard deviations of the mean of six replicates. See Table 4.1 for the tillage treatments. 4.3.6 Soil bulk density Soil bulk density ranged between 1.2 to 1.4 g cm‐3 in the 0–5 cm soil layer and between 1.5 to 1.8 g cm−3 in the 20–30 cm soil layer (Fig. 4.6). Hence, bulk density increased with depth. The inter‐annual variations were larger than the differences between treatments. There were no clear trends over the time. The relatively high bulk density in the 20–30 cm layer,79 and to a lesser extent in the 10–20 cm soil layer was observed in all treatments, suggesting that this high bulk density was not related to the tillage treatments. Fig. 4.4 Changes in soil carbon stocks (t ha−1) in the topsoil (0–30 cm) of four tillage treatments during the period 2004 to 2018. Dotted lines represent trend lines. See Table 4.1 for the tillage treatments. Table 4.3 Soil C stocks (0–30 cm) in the four treatments in 2001, 2006, 2011 and 2018, and estimated C sequestration rates in the four tillage treatments for three periods. See Table 4.1 for the tillage treatments. CK CT RT NT C stock in 0–30 cm soil layer, t ha−1 *

* Different letters in the same row indicate significant differences at p< 0.05. 4.4. Discussion 4.4.1 Depth‐distributions of carbon and nutrients in soil The winter wheat–summer maize double cropping system of the North China Plain is productive, also providing much straw and stubble (Han et al., 2018). Crop yields increased steadily during the last few decades, through the use of improved germplasms, fertilizers and pesticides (Jaggard et al., 2010). Until recently, straw from the double cropping system was used as animal feed and biofuel, or burned in the field (Xin‐sheng et al., 2011),80 indicating that the soil C stock was replenished by input from stubble and roots only. However, the traditional mixed‐crop livestock farm has rapidly disappeared during the last few decades (e.g., (Jin et al., 2020), and is being replaced by specialized livestock farms, which use mainly concentrated feed and little or no straw, and specialized crop production systems thatproducefor themarket. Additionally, theuseas biofuelhas rapidly decreased, because a ban on crop residue burning, both in the field and in the homestead (Qu et al., 2012), was introduced from 2000 onwards; many farmers are still struggling to manage maize straw. As a result, increased amounts of crop residues are available to feed the soil and SOC stocks increased in the North China Plain during the last few decades (Kong, 2014; Wang et al., 2020). This is also apparent in the results of our experiment; SOC stocks increased in all treatments but with large differences between treatments (Fig. 4.4). There are two possible main reasons for the relatively high soil C sequestration. First, the soil was ‘carbon deficient’ due to thousands of years of conventional soil cultivation and cropping in the North China Plain (Cheng et al., 2005), concomitant with straw removal (for use as biofuel or animal feed) or straw burning. Secondly, increasing amounts of crop residues have become available due to the increasing crop yields in recent decades, increasing the return of crop residues to the soil. This suggest that SOC sequestration rates were strongly influenced by changes in C inputs over time. Tillage treatments significantly affected the depth distribution of C in soil, and to a lesser extent, the depth distributions of AN, AP and AK. Our results support the claim that, especially no tillage (NT) and reduced tillage (RT) combined with straw return, lead to the enhanced stratification of SOC compared to the conventional practice (CK treatment) of annual moldboard ploughing and the removal of maize straw. The SOC content of the 0–5 cm soil layer, and to a lesser extent, of the 5–10 cm soil layer were higher in RT and NT than in CK and CT treatments, while the opposite was true for the 10–20 and 20–30 cm soil layers (Fig. 4.3). This difference in SOC stratification with depth is likely the combined result of (i) a difference between treatments in tillage following the maize harvest; (ii) maize straw removal in the CK treatment; and (iii) lower wheat yields in the NT, to a lesser extent in the RT treatment, compared to the other treatments (Coppens et al., 2006; Giacomini et al., 2007). The SOC content of the 10–20 and 20–30 cm soil layers were significantly higher at the CT treatment than at the RT and NT treatments at the end of the experiment. This suggests that the difference between CT and RT/NT in crop yield and associated root biomass was an important factor for the difference in content SOC between the 10–20 and 20–30 cm soil layers.81 Fig. 4.5 Available soil nitrogen (a. AN, g kg −1), soil phosphorus (b, AP, mg kg−1) and soil potassium (c. AK, g kg−1) in the 0–5, 5–10, 10–20 and 20–30 cm soil layers in a double cropping system with four tillage treatments during the period 2004 to 2018. See Table 4.1 for the tillage treatments.82 Fig. 4.6 Soil bulk density (g cm−3) of the 0–5, 5–10, 10–20 and 20–30 cm soil layers of a double cropping system with four tillage treatments in 2005, 2006, 2012, 2015, and 2017. Line bars represent the standard deviation of the mean of six replicates. See Table 4.1 for the tillage treatments. The relative enrichment of AP in the 0–5 and 5–10 cm soil layers and the relative depletion of AP in the 10–20 cm of the NT and RT treatments compared to the CK and CT treatments reflect the low mobility of P in soil. Phosphorus is mixed through the soil by soil cultivation and possibly bioturbation, but little by leaching and diffusive transport. These results are consistent with results of previous studies showing thatAP was concentrated in surfacesoil underconservationtillagemanagementduetolowersoildisturbance(Cade‐Menunetal., 2010; Vu et al., 2009). The relative enrichment of P in the soil surface layers was also attributed to the retention of P in the accumulated SOC (Weil et al., 1988; Zibilske et al., 2002). Though this is probably also true for our experiment, the greatest enrichment of AP inthesurfacelayersoftheNTandRTtreatmentslikelyresultedfromthesurfaceapplication83 of the DAP fertilizers, although DAP was applied in bands at a depth of 5 cm in the NT treatment. The annual application of 121 kg P ha‐1 exceeded the withdrawal of P with harvestedwheatandmaize(notshown),indicatingthattherewasacontinuousenrichment of P in the soil. However, this was not clearly reflected in the results of the AP analyses. There were no significant differences between the tillage treatments in the AK content, which confirms that the tillage method has little or no influence on the distribution of extractable K (Matowo et al., 1999; Zuber et al., 2015). Relative increases in exchangeable K in soil surface layers of the RT and NT treatments may be related to the release of K from K‐rich straw and stubble (Lozano‐García and Parras‐Alcántara, 2014; Martin‐Rueda et al., 2007). Therelative low content ofAK in theCK treatmentssupportsthis,as themaize straw was removed from the field in this treatment (Fig. 4.5). 4.4.2 Responses of maize and wheat grain yields to tillage treatments Earlierreportsindicatethatno‐tillageagriculturedecreasedwheatyieldsin theNorthChina Plain (Kan et al., 2020; Li et al., 2015) and elsewhere (Amato et al., 2013; Känkänen et al., 2011), dependent on crop rotation and crop residue management. Our results support this conclusion, indicating that no tillage lowers wheat yields not only in rainfed conditions but also under irrigation. However, wheat yields of the NT treatment were similar to those of the CT and RT treatments during the first years (Fig. 4.1), indicating that the negative effect of NT on wheat yield developed over time. We do not exclude the possibility that a lower soil temperature in the NT treatment, compared to the other treatments, played a role in reducingwheat yields(Eckert,1984;GravenandCarter,1991;Herbeketal., 1986).Apoorer germination and tillering due to soil compaction at a depth of 5–30 cm, and a poorer access of wheat roots for the applied nutrients, may also have played a role. We noticed that the growth and development of the wheat plants were delayed in the NT treatment compared to the other treatments (not shown). No tillage and the surface mulching of crop residues may reduce soil evaporation, and thereby conserve soil water in dryland agriculture, and as a result may enhance crop yield. However, available soil moisture was not a limiting factor in our study because of the imposedirrigationmanagement.Itwasobservedthatthewheatyielddeclinewithnotillage was relatively large at low rates of fertilization (Alvarez and Steinbach, 2009; Lundy et al., 2015;Ogleetal.,2019).ThoughtheNandPfertilization rateswererelatively high(common practice),OlsenPwasrelativelylow(5to12mg/kg)inthesoiloftheNTtreatment(Fig.4.5), andthismayhavecontributedtotherelativelylargewheatyielddeclineintheNTtreatment. Amounts of AN and AK did not differ much between treatments (Fig. 4.5). Maize yields were not affected by tillage treatments (Fig. 4.1). This was in contrast with84 results of previous studies, which revealed that no tillage had a relatively large depressive effectonmaizeyields(Pittelkowetal.,2015a;Rusinamhodzietal.,2011;Toliveretal.,2012). However, our tillage treatments were imposed after the maize harvest and before wheat seeding,whilenotillagewithsurfacemulchingwasappliedatalltreatmentsafterthewheat harvest and before maize seeding. Evidently, the tillage treatments did not have a direct effect on maize. There are three additional possible reasons why NT (and RT) had greater effects on wheat yields than on maize yields. First, maize is less sensitive to a compacted subsoil than wheat because of its shallow root system (and the ample supply of irrigation water and fertilizer N and P). For example, Zhou et al. (2008) found that 75% of maize roots and 45% of wheat roots were in the topsoil. They also found that winter wheat was able to use, on average, more subsoil nitrogen than summer maize. Second, maize was planted during the hot summer season and wheat during the cold winter season; as a consequence, soil temperature was not a limiting growth factor for maize. Third, the mineralization of organically bound nutrients was enhanced during the warm and humid summer season, thus alleviating any shortage of nutrients under NT conditions. Gross N mineralization is strongly related to temperature, and the difference between NT and CT was weakened in the maize season (Dong et al., 2012). Hence, there were no shortages of available nutrients in the NT treatment during the maize growing season. 4.4.3 Carbon stock and sequestration rate The sequestration of SOC in the 0–30cm layer was larger in the CT treatment than in theNT and RT treatments at the end of the experiment (Fig. 4.4). This contrasted with the results reported by Powlson et al. (2014) and Corbeels (2016), indicating that NT leads to a higher SOC stock than CT. Indeed, SOC stocks were larger in NT initially, but the sequestration of SOC slowed down in the NT treatment compared to the CT treatment. Corbeels (2016) observed that SOC stocks were higher in NT than in CT treatments in the Cerrado of Brazil for the first 11 to 14 years, but that the differences between NT and CT in SOC stocks were negligible thereafter. A meta‐analysis by West and Post (2002) revealed that soil C sequestration lasted for approximately 20 years following the adoption of NT. In the current study, enhanced SOC sequestration under NT lasted only for a relatively short period. We speculate that the short duration of the enhanced SOC sequestration in the NT treatments may be related to the relatively large amounts of biomass returned to the soil in our double cropping system. There was essentially no increase in SOC content in the 0–5 cm soil after 2010 (following 8 years of NT adoption), indicating that a new steady state was attained, thus limiting the soil’s capacity to accumulate more SOC in the soil surface layers. The differences among tillage treatments in SOC sequestration likely resulted from the differences between treatments in C input, decomposition rates, and physical protection of85 C in soil. Ogle et al. (2012) suggested that when C inputs declined by more than 15% following NT, C stocks would also decline. The average annual C input from aboveground crop residues was slightly higher in the CT treatment than in the RT and NT treatments, but the differences were not statistically significant (Table 4.2). Interestingly, the total C stock also increased in the 0–30 cm soil layer of the CK treatment; the total SOC stock in the CK treatment was only slightly lower than those in the RT and NT treatments, despite the removal of the maize straw in the CK treatment (Fig. 4.4). These results indicate that the removal of the maize straw had only a relatively small effect on the SOC stock in the end. Tillage may destroy soil aggregates, thereby enhancing the decomposition of organic material by microorganisms. Tillage also incorporates crop residues in the soil and partially in the subsoil, and may facilitate the downward growth of crop roots into the subsoil. This mayenhanceSOCsequestration inthesubsoilbecausetherateofdecomposition oforganic matter is lower in the subsoil than in the topsoil due to a lower aeration and temperature. 4.5 Conclusions This study evaluated the changes in crop yields, and in soil carbon and nutrients stocks in a winter wheat–summer maize double cropping system, with four different tillage practices imposed after maize harvests over a 17‐year period. The average winter wheat yields were 18% lower under no tillage (NT) and 6% lower under reduced tillage (RT) than under conventional moldboard plowing (CT) during 2005 to 2018. Initially, NT and RT treatments rapidly increased the content of SOC in the soil surface layers, but after 17 years of SOC content was higher under the CT treatment than the NT and RT treatments. Therefore, no tillage and reduced tillage decreased both wheat yields and soil C sequestration over time. Hence, our hypotheses were both rejected. Tillage treatments did not significantly affect maize yields. Tillage treatments influenced the distributions with the depth of available N, P and K. The AP/AN ratio in the 0–5 cm soil layer was relatively high at NT and RT treatments and low at CT and CK treatments. The AK/AP ratio was relatively high at NT and RT treatments and relatively low at CK treatments. These differential accumulations of available soil nutrients, together with a relatively high bulk density of the subsoil, may affect the nutrition of crops in the long‐term, and may contribute to the relatively low winter wheat yield in the NT treatment in the double cropping system. Therefore, the dynamics of soil nutrients in different soil layers must be considered in studies evaluating the effects of tillage on soil carbon sequestration and crop yield under different regional climatic conditions.86

This research was funded by National Key Research and Development Program of China (2021YFD190100202) and Hebei Key R&D Initiative Project (20326422D). Fig. S4.1 Average daily temperature (℃) and total precipitation (mm) during the winter wheat and summer maize growing seasons for the period 2005 to 2018.87 Fig. S4.2 Ratios (wt/wt) of available P (AP) and available N (AN) (a), available K (AK) and AP (b), and of AK and AN (c) in four soil layers (0‐5, 5‐10, 10‐20 and 20‐30 cm) and four tillage treatments (means of the

5. A bore‐hole method for remediating compacted subsoils increased maize yield ‐ prototype field tests Soil compaction in agriculture is a serious threat for soil functioning. Various methods have been developed and tested during last decades to prevent soil compaction, and to remediate compacted subsoils through deep ploughing or subsoiling. These remediation measures can be effective, but are costly and may have negative side‐effects. The objective of our study was to examine a prototype precision bore‐hole method for row crops growing on soils with compacted subsoils. Factorial field tests were conducted on sand soil with an over‐compacted subsoil below 35cm in Odiliapeel (Netherlands) and on sandy loam with over‐compacted layers at 15 to 30 cm in Luancheng (China), with maize and sorghum as test crops. Treatments included bore‐holes with different diameter (range 6 ‐10 cm) and depth (30 and 60 cm), without and with manure additions to the loosened soil used to re‐fill the bore‐holes. Seeds of maize and sorghum were placed above the locations of the bore‐holes. The bore‐hole method was effective in enhancing maize yields by ~30% in the two field experiments in Luancheng and in one treatment in Odiliapeel. The shallow depth of the compacted soil layer likely contributed to the relatively large yield effects of the bore‐ hole treatments in Luancheng. No clear effects were found for differences in bore‐hole diameter and bore‐hole depth. We observed that roots grew preferentially in the bore‐ holes, but we did not find statistically significant differences in root weight between treatments for depths of 0‐20, 20‐40 and 40‐60 cm. Evidently, the bore‐hole method was effective in enhancing the yield of maize grown on compacted subsoils, but further tests are needed for exploring the potentials of the proto‐ type method in practice and for a better understanding of the cause‐effect relationships. Based on: Peipei Yang, Wenxu Dong, Jan van den Akker, Oene Oenema (submitted). A bore‐hole method for remediating compacted subsoils increased maize yield ‐ prototype field tests90 5.1 Introduction Soil compaction in agriculture is a serious concern, since it affects the physics of the soil (e.g., bulk density, soil porosity, soil strength), and thereby the functioning of the soil (Batey, 2009; Nawaz et al., 2013). Over‐compaction of soil may lead to decreases in crop yield and soil biodiversity, ponding water, and increases in runoff and emissions of nitrous oxide (Alaoui et al., 2018; Bussell et al., 2021). It results in increased fuel consuming in tillage, and often in additional water and fertilizer consumption, to make up the yield loss (Aridhee et al., 2020; Obour and Ugarte, 2021; Wu et al., 2022). Compaction of the subsoil is especially a concern, because it is not easily visible and/or recognized, and difficult to remediate. As a result, the effects may persists for decades (Chamen et al., 2015). Soil compaction is mostly attributed to high axle loads in mechanized agriculture (e.g., (Keller et al., 2019a; Schjonning et al., 2015)) to improper field management (Chen et al., 2022), but there are also natural and/or geo‐genetic causes of over‐compacted soil layers (Laker and Nortjé, 2020). Early estimates indicate that about 68 million ha of agricultural land in the world has been affected by soil compaction (Oldeman, 1991), but these estimates are uncertain, because of lack of monitoring and lack of uniform and universal methods and criteria for assessing over‐compacted soils. Both experimental measurements (e.g. (Lebert et al., 2007)) and modelling approaches (e.g., (Schjonning et al., 2015)) have been proposed. By using a statistical modelling approach, Brus and Van Den Akker (2018a) estimated that about 43% of the subsoils in the Netherlands are over‐compacted. Measures to address soil compaction are commonly categorized in three groups, i.e., (i) prevention measures, aiming at avoiding and preventing soil compaction; (ii) remediation measures, aiming at ameliorating compacted soil; and (iii) alleviation measures, aiming at neutralizing the negative effects of compacted soil (Yang et al., 2022). Evidently, preventive measure address situations where soils have not yet been (seriously) over compacted, but where soils compaction looms through high axle loads, trampling animals and/or improper soil cultivation. Preventive measures have to be prioritized (Schjonning et al., 2015). Remediation and alleviation measures address situations where the soils have been over‐ compacted already, either naturally or human‐induced. Remediation measures break‐up the compacted (sub)soil layers through subsoiling and deep ploughing (Bennie and Botha, 1986). The effects of these measures is on average positive but variable and costly, while the effects decrease over time (Peralta et al., 2021; Schneider et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2022). Also, re‐compaction looms if soil management is not adjusted. Alleviation measures also address situations with compacted subsoils; these measures aim at neutralizing the91 negative impacts of soil compaction through (increased/improved) fertilization, irrigation and/or drainage, but do not address the cause of the negative impacts. Evidently, all types of measures may be needed in the end, depening on site‐specific conditions (Yang et al., 2022). Compacted subsoil often requires remediation for proper soil functioning and diminishing the aforementioned negative impacts. Deep ploughing and subsoiling are common measures for compacted subsoil remediation, but have drawbacks. They require large power and large amounts of energy, and the effects do not last for long (Schneider et al., 2017). Deep ploughing reverses soil horizons, thereby burying fertile topsoil while the ‘open soil condition’ is vulnerable to re‐compaction by subsequent machinery traffic and grazing animals (Spoor, 2006). Subsoiling is less destructive for the soil profile than deep ploughing, depending also on the depth, width and shape of the shanks and blades, and the frequency of subsoiling (Raper and Bergtold, 2007). The latter authors suggested to use controlled traffic concepts to ensure alignment of plant rows and subsoiled zones, and to further optimize the shape and size of the shanks and blades, to save draft and fuel. They also indicated that two passes of a tractor in the subsoiled area will cause the soil to return to its previous state prior to subsoiling. In a long‐term field experiment in China, Yang et al. (2021) observed that subsoiling combined with applying organic manure gave better soil functioning than subsoiling without organic manure, or compared to organic manure application without subsoiling. Rather similar results were obtained by Leskiw et al. (2012) in a field experiment in Canada. Recently, Makange et al. (2021) improved our understanding of the mechanism and the practice of precision subsoiling further through a combination of simulation modelling, sensors and experimental testing. This increased understanding contributes to lowering draft and fuel consumption by subsoiling and to greater endurance of the effects. Evidently, there is a need for greater precision and lowering the cost and negative side‐ effects of ameliorating subsoil compaction. Greater precision refers to ameliorating subsoil compaction to where it is mostly needed, which depends of course on the soil conditions, crop type and planting structure. Lowering the cost and negative side‐effects also depends on soil conditions and on where and how the amelioration is conducted. Thus precision subsoiling seems to be preferred above deep ploughing as measure to ameliorate subsoil compaction. A possible further step is to ameliorate subsoil compaction only below plants, growing in rows, especially when yield loss is the main impact of over‐compacted soil. This notion led to the idea to develop and test a ‘precision bore‐hole method’, whereby amelioration of the soil is localized in bore‐holes, positioned below the plants. The objectives of this ‘ precision bore‐hole method’ are (i) to locally ameliorate over‐92 compacted subsoils for growing crops, (ii) to lower the demand for power and energy for ameliorating over‐compacted subsoil; (iii) to maintain the original soil profile where needed and possible, so as to minimize the risk of soil instability, and (iv) to allow adding soil amendments to the soil in the bore holes. Evidently, this method is most applicable to row crops, which growth and development of roots are hampered by subsoil compaction, and to fields where bore‐holes through compacted soil may increase infiltration and drainage. The objective of the study reported here was to test the effectiveness of proto‐types of a precision bore‐hole method on root growth and crop yield in soils with compacted subsoil. A series of prototype tests were conducted to find out the optimal depth and diameter of the bore‐holes, and the effects of adding manure to the soil in the bore‐holes. Maize and sorghum were selected as test crops, because maize and sorghum have different sensitiveness to soil compaction (Altuntas et al., 2005; Awadhwal and Thierstein, 1985). Experiments were conducted in The Netherlands (where contractors often use large machines with high axle loads) and China (with small‐holder agriculture and small machines). We hypothesis that: (i) maize will profit more from the boreholes than sorghum, because maize roots will preferentially growth in the loosened soil in the bore‐ holes below the planting hole, and thereby increase crop yields, (ii) the effectiveness of the boreholes depend on their depths and diameters, and (iii) amending the soil with manure in bore holes favors root growth and crop yield. 5.2 Materials and methods 5.2.1 Site description Filed experiment were conducted in Odiliapeel (51°40’N, 5°44’E, mean elevation 22 m), South‐East of The Netherlands, and Luancheng (37°53’N, 114°41’E, mean elevation 50 m) in the North China Plan (NCP), China. Climate in The Netherlands is temperate maritime with mild winters and cool summers. The annual mean temperature is 10.8℃ and the mean annual precipitation 832 mm. North China Plain has a subtropical monsoon climate, with cold and dry winters and warm and humid summer months. The annual mean temperature is 12°C and the annual mean precipitation 530 mm in Luancheng. Odiliapeel has a sandy soil with 1% clay and 7‐9% silt (Table 5.1), which is vulnerable to compaction. The land has been intensively cultivated (potatoes, vegetables, silage maize) and manured in the past, and is commonly irrigated during dry‐spells. Carrots were grown in 2016, before which a relatively deep tillage (~35 cm) was applied. At the start of the93 field experiment, soil bulk density was 1.48 g/cm3 in the topsoil and 1.68 g/cm3 in the subsoil. The Luancheng Agroecosystem Experimental Station is a main research facility of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and is in the piedmont region of the Taihang Mountains, at the fringe of the NCP. Soils in Luancheng have sandy loam texture, with a clay content of 17‐18% and silt content of 58‐60% (Table 5.1). The common, double cropping system is winter wheat – summer maize, with flood irrigation in the NCP. Shallow rotary tillage (0‐10 cm) is conducted after maize harvest and no‐tillage after winter wheat harvest. Soils have a relative high soil bulk density at depth >15 cm. Table 5.1 Background soil characters in each experimental site Site Soil layer BD g/cm3 Clay content % Silt content % SOM content %

5.2.2 Field experiments in Odiliapeel Two field experiments were conducted, each with 12 treatments, including 3 bore‐hole treatments, 2 manure treatments (with and without manure application) and 2 crops (silage maize and sorghum). The planting density was 9 plants/m2 for both maize and sorghum, equivalent to 90,000/ha. The area of each plot was 1m*1m In 2017, bore‐hole treatments included (i) no bore‐holes (C0, control treatment), (ii) 5 holes (Ø 1 cm; depth 60 cm) within a circle (Ø 30 cm) around each plant (C1), and (iii) 1 bore‐hole (Ø 6 cm; depth 60 cm) per plant (C6). Treatments were carried out in triplicate. In 2018, bore‐hole treatments included (i) no bore‐hole (C0), (ii) 1 bore‐hole (Ø 6 cm, depth 60 cm) per plant (C6), and (iii) 1 bore‐hole (Ø 9 cm, depth 60 cm) per plant (C9). Treatments were carried out in quadruple. The five bore‐holes ‘bore‐holes’ of C1 (Ø 1 cm; depth 60 cm) per planting hole were made by the stick of a hand penetrometer, and were not treated further. The bore‐holes of the94 C6 and C9 treatments were made by hand augers; here bore holes were filled again with loosened soil (separately for 0‐30 cm and 30‐60 cm layers). In the manure treatments (indicated by “+”), dried chicken manure was either surface applied and incorporated in the top 5 cm of the soil (C0 and C1 treatments) or mixed with the soil 0‐30 cm from the bore holes. Manure was applied at 110 kg N ha‐1 . The composition of the manure is presented in Table S5.1) One month after sowing, the germination rate was recorded. Weeding was done when considered necessary (once in 2 to 6 weeks, depending on rainfall and the crop coverage of the soil). Irrigation was not applied, so as not to alleviate the effects of soil compaction. At harvest, whole plants were harvested and threshed manually. The grain yield and biomass yield were dried and weighted respectively. After harvest, soil‐root columns were taken to examine the root profiles in selected treatments in triplicate; soil columns (35 cm wide, 10 cm thick and 60 cm deep) below the center plants were taken from excavated soil pits, using a 35x60 cm large pinboard with 10 cm long nails (Schuurman and Goedewaagen, 1971). Soil columns were transported to the laboratory, and the soil was gently rinsed from the roots on the same day as the soil columns had been taken. Root profiles were photographed, and the root mass from 0‐20 cm, 20‐40 cm and >40 cm were dried at 65°C and the dry weight recorded. Dried roots were incinerated at 300°C and the ash weights were recorded. During the growing periods, daily mean temperature was 17.2°C in 2017 and 19.3°C in 2018. Total precipitation was 325 mm in 2017 and 170 mm in 2018 (Fig. 5.1). Crops suffered from drought in both years, especially in 2018. After harvest, soil penetration resistance (PR) was measured around the roots in each plot in triplicate and the results were averaged per depth.95 Fig. 5.1 Daily mean temperature and precipitation during the growing seasons in Odiliapeel in 2017 (a) and96 2018 (b), and in Luancheng in 2018 (c). 5.2.3 Field experiments in Luancheng Two experiments were conducted, in Luancheng North and Luancheng South. It was planned to irrigate the North field (as is common practice) and the South field not (so as not to alleviate the effects of soil compaction), but because of the dry conditions at planting both fields were irrigated and ultimately had the same design and management. Only maize was planted, and the planting density was 90,000/ha, equivalent to Odiliapeel, but higher than the Luancheng local practice (55,000/ha). The area of each plot was 1.34m*1.34m, i.e., 16 plants per plot. The experiments had 10 treatments, i.e., 5 soil bore‐hole treatments combined with 2 manure treatments (without and with manure application). Bore‐hole treatments included (i) no bore‐holes (C0, control treatment), (ii) 1 bore‐hole (Ø 7 cm, depth 30 cm) per plant C7/30, (iii) 1 bore hole (Ø 7 cm, depth 60 cm) per plant (C7/60), (iv) 1 bore hole (Ø 10 cm, depth 30 cm) per plant (C10/30) and (v) 1 bore‐hole (Ø 10 cm, depth 60 cm) per plant (C10/60), in triplicate. The bore‐holes were made by hand augers, and bore holes were filled again with loosened soil (separately for 0‐30 cm and 30‐60 cm layers). In the manure treatments (indicated by “+”), dried pig manure was either surface applied and incorporated in the top 5 cm of the soil (C0 treatment) or mixed with the soil 0‐30 cm from the bore holes. Manure was applied at 110 kg N ha‐1 . The composition of the manure is presented in Table S5.1). Following planting, 60 mm of irrigation was given on Apr 26 and again on July 8 respectively, which is common practice in the region. But the maize still suffered from drought due to high temperature and strong transpiration (Fig. 5.1). Manual weeding was conducted when deemed necessary. Whole maize plants were harvested and threshed manually. Biomass and grain were dried at 65°C and weighted. Root profiles were examined in the South site, using the same procedure as in Odiliapeel. After harvest, soil penetration resistance (PR) was measured in each plot in triplicate and the results were averaged per depth. 5.2.4 Statistical analysis Statistical analyses were performed using R Software (version 4.0.3, (RCoreTeam, 2013)). The significance of between‐treatment differences in grain yield, root weight, and soil penetration resistance (PR) were analyzed using analysis of variance (one‐way ANOVA). The Least Significant Difference (LSD) test was used for multiple comparisons between97 means of treatments. Functions of avo() and LST.test() were applied in the calculations. The differences were only considered significant when P < 0.05. Figures and tables were performed by Microsoft Office 2010 and R studio (version 1.1.463). 5.3 Results 5.3.1 Grain and biomass yields Within‐treatment variability in grain yields was high in Odiliapeel, and differences between mean yields of bore‐hole treatment were not statistically significant, apart from the maize in 2018; maize grain yields of C9 were higher than those of C0 (Fig 5.2a). The large within‐ treatment variability was attributed to drought (including a poor germination) and to the small plots. Mean maize grain yields (6 to 10 Mg/ha/yr) were relatively low compared to national average maize grain yields (8 to 14 Mg/ha/yr). Mean sorghum grain yields (4 to 6 Mg/ha/yr) were also low (Fig 5.2b); sorghum was introduced only recently in The Netherlands and there are no robust yield statistics yet. Manure addition had no effect on grain and biomass yields in Odiliapeel, and thus yields were averaged over bore‐hole treatments (Fig. S5.2). There were significant differences between bore‐hole treatments in maize grain yields in Luancheng, in both fields (Fig. 5.2c). The widest bore‐holes (treatments C10) tended to give the highest yields (P<0.05, Fig. 5.2c); differences in mean grain yield were 1 to 2 Mg/ha/yr. There were no clear differences between a bore‐hole depth of 30 cm and 60 cm, which was likely related to the shallow depth of the over‐compacted soil. Within‐ treatment variability in grain yields was smaller in Luancheng than in Odiliapeel, likely because of the somewhat larger plots and the influence of irrigation. Differences between treatments in biomass yields were rather similar to the differences in grain yields (Fig. 5.3). Effects of the bore‐hole treatments were small in Odiliapeel and significant in Luancheng South (but not in Luancheng North). The mean biomass yields of maize and sorghum in Odiliapeel were much lower in 2018 than in 2017 (Fig 5.3a, 5.3b), while mean grain yields did not differ much between 2017 and 2018 (Fig 5.2a, 5.2b). This apparent anomaly was attributed to the use of different crop varieties, and to the period of drought stress, which was different between 2017 and 2018 (Fig. 5.1). There were no differences between manure treatments in biomass yield (Fig. S5.3).98 Fig. 5.2 Mean grain yields of maize and sorghum, as affected by bore‐hole treatments in Odiliapeel (a, b) and in Luancheng (c). Mean results of the bore‐hole treatments (including manure and no manure treatments). Error bars indicate standard deviations; treatments sharing the same letters are not significantly different at P < 0.05 level according to the LSD test.99 Fig. 5.3 Mean aboveground biomass yields of silage maize and sorghum, as affected by the bore‐hole treatments and manure application in Odiliapeel (a, b) and in Luancheng in 2018 (c). Mean results of the bore hole treatments, including the manure and no manure treatments. Error bars indicate standard deviations; treatments sharing the same letters are not significantly different at P < 0.05 level according to the LSD test.100 5.3.2 Root distributions and weights More than 80% of the total root weight was found in the upper 20 cm in Odiliapeel (Fig 5.4a) and Luancheng (Fig. 5.4c). Sorghum plants had a slightly smaller proportion of roots in the topsoil than maize; sorghum had relatively more roots in the soil layers 20 to 40 cm and 40 to 60 cm than maize (Fig. 5.4b). There were no statistical differences between treatments in total root weight of both maize and sorghum in Odiliapeel. However, total root weight was significantly higher in treatments with bore holes than in the treatment without bore holes in Luancheng South (Fig. 5.4c), notably in the top 0‐20 cm. The increase in root weight in the top 20 cm of the soil reflects that the soil was compacted at shallow depth (Table 5.1), which is in line with the shallow rotary tillage (0‐10 cm). The total root mass in the subsoil did not increase in the bore‐hole treatments, which supports the finding that 60 cm deep bore‐holes did not gave higher maize yields than 30 cm deep bore‐holes in Luanchuang (Figs 5.2c, 5.3c). Root distributions with depth and total root weight were not affected by manure. Visual observations of the root profiles revealed that roots of maize and sorghum in the subsoil preferentially followed bore‐holes (e.g. Fig. 5.1), suggesting that roots could easily penetrate the loosened subsoil in the bore‐holes to a depth of 60 cm. This concentration of maize roots and to a lesser extent of sorghum roots did not lead to statistically significant increases in root weight in the 20 to 40 cm soil layers (Fig 5.3a, 5.3b). However, we did not quantify the root length distribution, which commonly is a better indicator for root activity (de Moraes et al., 2020). 5.3.3 Soil penetration resistance Soil penetration resistance was measured after the harvest of the crops. Tests were conducted near the original positions of the maize and sorghum plants. Results indicate that bore‐hole treatments had lower penetration resistance than the control treatments in Odiliapeel in both 2017 and 2018 (Fig. 5.5a, 5.5b). In 2017, penetration resistance increased strongly between depth of 40 and 60 cm (Fig. 5.5a). In 2018, penetration resistance at shallower depth than in 2017 in the control treatments, mainly because of differences in soil moisture content. However, the increases with depth were much lower in the bore‐hole treatments than in the control treatments (Fig. 5.5b). Mean penetration resistance was lower in the sandy loam soil of Luancheng than in the sandy soil of Odiliapeel, especially in the subsoil. Further, penetration resistance values were significantly lower in the bore‐hole treatments than in the control treatment in101 Luancheng North and South (Fig. 5.5c). Treatments with wide (Ø 10 cm) and deep (60 cm) bore‐holes had the lowest penetration resistance, as expected. Differences were statistically significant below a depth of about 10‐15 cm. Fig. 5.4 Dry root weight per plant (means ± s.d.) as function of bore‐hole treatment in Odiliapeel (a, maize; b, sorghum) and in Luancheng South site (c, maize). Error bars indicate standard deviations of total root dry weight of each plant. Treatments with the same letter are not significantly different at P < 0.05. Means of the bore‐hole treatment include the manure and no manure treatments.102 Fig. 5.5 Soil penetration resistance in kPa (means ± s.d., n=3) at different depth as function of bore‐hole treatment at harvest time in Odiliapeel 2017 (a, b), 2018 (c, d), and Luancheng north site (e), Luancheng south site (f). Results of bore‐hole treatments were averaged over manure treatments.103 5.4 Discussion 5.4.1 Effects of bore‐hole diameter and depth The sandy soil in Odiliapeel and the sandy loam in Luancheng have high to very high susceptibility to compaction, according to the texture‐packing density classification of (Spoor et al., 2003). Both soils were rather homogenous with depth in soil texture, but the compacted layer was at shallow depth in Luancheng (10‐30 cm), due to shallow rotary cultivation and flood irrigation, and relatively deep (>35 cm) in Odiliapeel, due to relatively deep soil cultivation. Such differences will affect the responses of the crop to the compacted soil layers, as well as to the bore‐hole treatments. We tested only one bore‐ hole depth (0‐60 cm) in Odiliapeel and two in Luancheng (0‐30 and 0‐60 cm), combined with two diameters (6 and 9 cm in Odiliapeel, and 7 and 10 cm in Luancheng; augers slightly differed in size between Odiliapeel and Luancheng because of different local practices). We tested also very narrow (Ø 1 cm) ‘bore‐holes’ (5 holes within a circle (Ø 30 cm) around each plant in Odiliapeel in 2017. However, there was no yield response (Fig. 5.2a, 5.2b), and observations on root distribution profiles revealed that roots did not preferentially growth in the holes (not shown). Thus, this treatment was not examined further. In contrast, one large bore‐hole (Ø 6 cm) per plant increased maize yield in 2018 significantly, and root distribution profiles revealed that roots did growth preferentially in these holes (Fig. S5.1), suggesting that the bore‐hole remediation practice was effective. However, a larger bore‐hole diameter (Ø 9 cm) did not increase maize and sorghum yields in Odiliapeel (Fig 5.2a,5.2b). Bore‐holes increased maize grain yields in both experiments in Luancheng (Fig. 5.2c). The mean increase in grain yield was nearly 2 Mg/ha in both years, equivalent to an increase of nearly 30% relative to the control treatment. This increase is larger than the mean increases in yield (6 to 10%) following deep ploughing or subsoiling (Schneider et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2022). There was no clear effect of bore‐hole diameter (7 versus 10 cm), and bore‐hole depth (30 versus 60 cm), although the root biomass tended to be larger in the treatments with the wider diameter, i.e., 10 cm (Fig. 5.5c). The lack of a difference between bore‐hole depths of 30 cm and 60 cm was not a surprise, as the compacted soil layer was at 10‐30 cm in Luancheng, and most of the root biomass weight (≥90%) was in the upper 20 cm (Fig. 5.5c). Thus remediating the compacted subsoil in Luancheng through bore‐holes appears to be an effective method to significantly increase grain yields. The mechanism of the yield‐enhancing effect of the bore‐hole treatments is likely related to better and deeper root growth, especially during the early stages of plant development, and to greater access to soil water and nutrients. It should be noted that the crops were104 well‐fertilized and irrigated, which will have alleviated the effects of subsoil compaction (e.g., (Zhang et al., 2012), but yet bore‐hole treatments were effective in enhancing crop yield. Manure addition, either broadcast on the soil surface in control treatments (and in the C1 treatment), or mixed with the top 30 cm of the soil from the bore‐holes, did not have a crop yield enhancing effect (Fig. S5.2), suggesting that the crops were not limited by (micro)nutrients at both field sites. Yet, manure placement in the bore‐holes has the potential to increase the effectiveness and the recovery in the crop of nutrients from the applied manure (Maillard and Angers, 2014), and at the same time guide plant roots through the bore‐holes. 5.4.2 Prototyping and testing a protype The word ‘prototype’ comes from the Latin words ‘proto’ (original) and ‘typus’ (model). A prototype is an early idea, concept or technique. Prototypes are being developed, tested and used in almost all sectors of society, including agriculture, construction, art, and simulation modeling. The idea of making and testing prototypes is centuries old, but the method of prototyping has become more formalized during the second half of the 20th century. For example, Vereijken (1997) described a formal method for prototyping and testing integrated and ecologically more sustainable arable farms. Yet, also less planned and designed ideas emerge and are being tested and further developed, including in soil compaction research. Prototype sensors for measuring soil compaction from the viewpoint of soil mechanics were reviewed by Hemmat and Adamchuk (2008); they discussed shortcomings of the protypes and identified priorities for further development. Machada and Lancas Machado and Lancas (2016) evaluated a prototype sensor to identify compacted soil layers and to control chiseling depth; they found that mechanical chiseling at variable depths reduced fuel consumption. Protype remediation and alleviation measures for soil compaction were discussed by Spoor (2006) in terms of soil fissuring and loosening; subsoiling should create fissures in the compacted soil layer with minimal disturbance. Such fissures in compacted soil layers will increase drainage of excessive water, and may have a conducting function for plant roots. Alternatively In a vineyard of South Africa, 90cm depth of trenches were applied in 1/4 area of the field, which shifted each year, and the whole field could receive loosening every 4 years; up to 69% of grape yield increase was obtained in that study (Laker and Nortjé, 2020). Basically, our bore‐hole method is an early prototype of a method and/or technique that incorporates ideas proposed by (Makange et al., 2021; Raper and Bergtold, 2007; Spoor, 2006). The aim is to remediate over‐compacted subsoils with high precision (underneath105 growing plants only) to enhance root growth and soil drainage, and to minimize the negative side‐effects that often occur with subsoiling and deep plowing, i.e., high power and energy demands and high risk of re‐compaction. Instead of creating more or less horizontal fissures with minimal disturbance, as is done with subsoiling, we created vertical bore holes in the compacted subsoil, which were refilled with loosened (and manured) soil. This practice resembles also the ideas of digging narrow (90 cm deep) trenches in vineyards in South Africa to ameliorate natural compacted subsoil; trenches were refilled with loosened and amended soil, and the grape trees planted in the amended strips gave up to 69% higher grape yields (Laker and Nortjé, 2020). However, a bore hole is from the mechanical point of view much more stable than a trench. Bore‐holes were made by hand augers, and tests were made in small plots. The total bore‐ hole area was ≤7% of the total surface area, which is far less than the case with deep ploughing and subsoiling. No prototype bore‐hole machine was made and tested, and thus no evaluation can be made of the demands for power and energy. Yet, designing a proto‐ type bore‐hole machine may be done on the basis of the results of our bore‐hole testing. We tested the prototype idea in field experiments, using maize and sorghum as test crops, and using crop yield and root growth as criteria, relative to control treatments without bore‐holes. Thus, the impact of remediating over‐compacted subsoil was evaluated, and not the driving forces, pressures and state indicators of soil compaction (Schjonning et al., 2015). Commonly, impact follows from a change of the state (and/or pressures and driving forces), and thus is a most important indicator as it deals with the functioning of the soil ecosystem services (Bünemann et al., 2018; Schulte et al., 2014). However, the mechanistic cause‐effect relations creating the yield effects in the field experiments with our bore‐hole prototype need further study. 5.4.3 Limitations of the study and outlook The bore‐hole method turned out to be effective in enhancing yield in the two field experiments in Luancheng and in one experimental treatment in Odiliapeel, indicating that the bore‐hole method can be effective in ameliorating over‐compacted soils. However, further tests and measurements are needed before bringing the method to practice. The needed test related to the optimal diameter and depth of the bore‐holes, which likely depend on the depth of the over‐compacted soil layer and crop type. The cause‐effect relationship of the yield enhancing effect of the bore‐hole method also requires further mechanistic underpinning through additional observations and measurements. Next, prototype machines should be developed that are able to make bore‐holes with the require diameter and depth, and at the appropriate place. Alternatively, the machine106 makes narrow trenches on the position of the planting rows, similar to trenches in the vineyards described by Laker and Nortjé (2020). The required investments, power, energy and time are important criteria for assessing the prototype machine. Likely, the cost increase with the depth of the bore‐holes and trenches, as with deep ploughing and subsoiling (Patterson et al., 1980). The bore‐hole method has been developed for row crops, and would be most applicable for perennial crops, i.e., fruit trees and vineyards, because bore‐holes (planting holes) have to be made only at planting the trees. For annual crops growing in rows, either new bore‐ holes have to be made each year, or precision positioning machines allow seeding above the earlier made bore‐holes. Not all row crops may respond well to the bore‐hole treatments; e.g. sorghum did not respond in Odiliapeel, likely because (1) a late and slow start of the germination of sorghum due to the cold temperature and initial drought (Fig. 5.1) and (2) sorghum roots mainly proliferate the upper 0‐30 cm of soil intensively (Lemaire and Charrier, 1996; Singh et al., 2010); and the 35 cm thick topsoil diminished the need for deep rooting. Therefore, in soils where subsoil compaction is too difficult to remediate, sorghum could be a substitute for silage maize. 5.5 Conclusions Literature reports indicate that there is an increasing need to prevent subsoil compaction by heavy machines and inappropriate soil cultivation, and to ameliorate over‐compacted subsoils and/or alleviate the impacts of over‐compacted subsoils. Ameliorating compacted subsoil by deep ploughing or subsoiling can be effective, but is associated with high cost and re‐compaction looms. We tested a precision bore‐hole method as prototype for ameliorating compacted subsoils planted with row crops, i.e., maize and sorghum. Bore‐ holes varied in diameter (6 to 10 cm) and depth (30 to 60 cm) and were re‐filled with loosened soil (without or with manure amendment). Next, seeds were planted above the positions of the bore‐holes. The bore‐hole method was effective in enhancing maize yields by ~30% in the two field experiments in Luancheng (China) and in one experimental treatment in Odiliapeel (The Netherlands). The compacted soil layer was at 15‐30 cm in Luancheng and at 30‐50 cm in Odiliapeel, and this difference likely contributed to the greater effects of the bore‐hole method in Luancheng. No clear differences were found for the bore‐hole diameter in the range of 6 to 10 cm. Also, the yield enhancing effect was similar in treatments with 30 cm and 60 cm deep bore‐holes in Luancheng. We observed that roots grew preferentially in the bore‐holes, but we did not find statistically significant differences in root weight between treatments for depths of 0‐20, 20‐40 and 40‐60 cm.107 Evidently, the bore‐hole method was effective in enhancing the yield of maize grown on compacted subsoils, but further tests are needed for exploring the potentials of the proto‐ type method in practice and for a better understanding of the cause‐effect relationships. Fig. S5.1 Maize roots of the bore‐hole C6 treatment in Odiliapeel 2017, showing that roots grew preferentially in bore‐holes108 Fig. S5.2 Results of all treatments. Mean grain yields of maize and sorghum, as affected by bore‐hole treatments and manure application in Odiliapeel (a, b) and in Luancheng (c). Error bars indicate standard deviations.109 Fig. S5.3 Results of all treatments. Mean aboveground biomass yields of silage maize and sorghum, as affected by the bore‐hole treatments and manure application in Odiliapeel (a, b) and in Luancheng in 2018 (c). Error bars indicate standard deviations.110 Table S5.1 Nutrient content (% of dry weight) of manure applied Site Manufacturer Nutrient Content Odiliapeel Monterra, NL Organic N 8% NH4 + ‐ N 3% P2O5 8% K2O 2% MgO 1% Luancheng Lvyuan, CN Organic matter 40% N+ P2O5+ K2O ≥5% Table S5.2 Biomass yield (YB), grain yield (YG), total root weight (Wroot) (means±s.d.) in all 4 experiments. Different letters in the same column of each experiment indicate significant differences at p<0.05. Plant Site Year Treatment YB YG Wroot

Units: YB, Mg/ha; YG, Mg/ha; Wroot, g/plant.111 6. General discussion 6.1 Introduction Soil compaction has been called a ‘soil threat’ as it causes deterioration or loss of soil functions.Compactedsubsoilsareespeciallyaconcern,becausecompactedsubsoilsarenot easily recognized andare difficult to remediate. Compactedsubsoils may have been formed by natural processes and factors (e.g., glaciation, illuviation of soil colloids, sodification, trampling animals) and by anthropogenic activities (e.g., machinery with high axle loads, inappropriatesoilcultivation,frequentfloodirrigation).Theincreasingweightofagricultural machinery is considered to be a main cause of subsoil compaction currently (Schonning et al., 2015; Keller et al., 2019). Thefunctioning andremediationofcompactedsubsoilsin agriculturehavebeenstudiedfor more than a century now. Most of these studies have been conducted in field experiments and laboratories, and have been supported by simulation modeling. Relatively few studies have been conducted in farmland and in smallholder agriculture. As a result, there is little knowledge of the nature and spatial variation of compacted subsoils in practice, and about soil compaction in smallholder agriculture, where there is no or less influence of heavy machinery. Studies examining remediation measures for compacted subsoils have shown thatthesemeasurecanbeeffective,butthattheirimpactisoftenofshortdurationandthat there are negative side effects (e.g., Schneider et al., 2017). Hence, there is a continuous searchformoreeffectivesoilcompactionprevention,remediationandalleviation measures with less negative side‐effects, and for improved tillage practices, including no‐till and reduced till. ThegeneralobjectiveofmyPhDthesisresearchwastoincreasetheunderstandingofspatial variations in soil compaction in farmers’ fields, and of the efficacy of measures aimed at the prevention, alleviation and remediation of soil compaction. The specific research objectives were: i. to review the recent (from 2000) literature on measures aimed at the prevention, alleviation and remediation of soil compaction, and to examine possible difference between small‐holder and mechanized agriculture; ii. to examine the relationships between spatial variations in subsoil compaction and spatial variations in soil properties, crop yield and nitrous oxide emissions in farmers’ fields;112 iii. to examine the effects of four soil tillage practices on soil bulk density, soil carbon and nutrient sequestration and crop yield in a long‐term field experiment; iv. todevelopandtestaprototypemeasureinthefieldforhigh‐precisionamelioration of compacted subsoil in small‐holder agriculture and mechanized agriculture. In this chapter, the main findings of my PhD thesis research are highlighted and discussed in abroadercontext.Thechapterendswithaconclusionsection,andasectioninwhichfuture research needs are suggested. 6.2 Main findings Measures for managing soil compaction can be classified into 3 groups according to their strategies, i.e., prevention, amelioration, and alleviation. According to my literature review presented in Chapter 2, it is clear that the emphasis in research during the last 20 years has beenontestingpreventionmeasuresinmechanizedagriculture,andontestingremediation and alleviation measures in small‐holder agriculture. The effectiveness of the three strategies, expressed in crop yield or soil bulk density changes, turned out to be rather similar in mechanized and small‐holder agriculture. Controlled traffic had a positive effect on crop yield in both mechanized agriculture (+38%) and small‐holder agriculture (+16%), and led to a lower soil bulk density in topsoil and subsoil (range: −4% to −6%). No‐till had negative effects on crop yield and increased bulk density, in both mechanized and small‐ holder agriculture. Deep tillage and subsoiling had positive effects on crop yields (up to +10%) Soil bulk density and soil penetration resistance were mostly used as state indicators for assessing soil compaction. However, bulk density is not a sensitive indicator (effect sizes of measuresweresmall(<10%)),andsoilpenetrationresistanceishighlysensitivetovariations insoilmoisturecontent.Effectsizesofcropyieldasanimpactindicatorwererelativelylarge, but variable because of interfering factors (climate, soil texture). My literature review reveals that prevention measures have to be prioritized, but that amelioration and alleviationareoftenequallyneededandalsoeffective,dependingonsite‐specificconditions. Hence, a toolbox of soil compaction prevention, amelioration, and alleviation measures is needed, with measures adjusted to site‐specific conditions. Within‐field spatial variations in bulk density of the subsoil and soil penetration resistance wererelativelysmall.Meansoilbulkdensityinthesub‐soil(30–35 cmand50‐55cm)ranged between fields from 1.36 ± 0.08 to 1.60 ± 0.11 g cm−3 . Mean wheat yields ranged between fieldsandyearsfrom7.6 ± 0.6and11.3 ± 2.4 Mg ha−1 .Semi‐variogramanalysesshowedthat crop yields and soil properties were mostly spatially dependent; nugget‐to‐sill ratios113 were < 25% with ranges of 137 to 773 m, and ranges of crop yield were larger than ranges ofsoilproperties.Within‐fieldspatialvariationsinsoilpropertieswerenotrelatedtowithin‐ field spatial variations in wheat yield. However, the ratio of CO2 to N2O emissions had a negative relationship with soil bulk density, especially following N application; emissions of N2O increased with an increase in soil bulk density. There was no specific threshold for subsoil bulk density beyond which emissions changed dramatically. Thus, potential N2O emissionisasensitiveindicatorforincreasesinsoilbulkdensityandthusforsoilcompaction. In a long term field experiment with an irrigated winter wheat – summer maize double cropping system in North China Plain, it was found that no‐tillage and reduced tillage treatments decreased winter wheat yields and tended to increase soil bulk density in the subsoil, relative to conventional moldboard plowing treatment. The average winter wheat yieldswere18%lowerunderno‐tillageand6%lowerunderreducedtillagecomparedtothe conventional moldboard plowing treatment, after 17 years (from 2001 to 2018). Tillage treatments did not significantly affect maize yields. Soil carbon stocks increased initially but decreased over time. In the surface layer (0–5 cm), SOC content of the no‐till treatment increased by 34% between 2005 and 2012, and then remained more or less constant at a level of 1.45 g kg−1 . No‐tillage and reduced tillage combined with straw return led to a clear accumulation of carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus in the surface layers of the soil. Soil bulk density ranged between 1.5 and 1.8 g cm−3 in the 20‐30 cm layer, and was related to tillage treatments. A prototype precision bore‐hole method was developed and tested for ameliorating compactedsubsoilsplantedwithrowcropsinOdiliapeel,NetherlandandLuancheng,China. Bore‐holes varied in diameter (6 to 10 cm) and depth (30 to 60 cm) and were re‐filled with loosened soil (without or with manure amendment); seeds were planted above the positions of the bore‐holes. The bore‐hole method was effective in enhancing the maize yield by ~30%, especially in Luancheng, where the subsoil was compacted at shallow depth (15‐30 cm). Bore‐hole diameter and bore‐hole depth did not lead to statistically significant differences in crop yield. Roots grew preferentially in the bore‐holes, but no statistically significant differences in root weight were found between treatments for depths of 0‐20, 20‐40 and 40‐60 cm. Sorghum yield did not respond to the bore‐hole treatments. 6.3 Effectiveness of soil compaction management measures Meta‐analysis of published results of research on measures addressing soil compaction has become a common method of synthesizing ‘the state of the art’. Thus, meta‐analyses have been conducted in evaluations of compaction levels induced by traffic (Ampoorter et al.,114 2012), in examining the plant morphological and physiological attributes in compacted soils (Mariotti et al., 2020), and in examining the impacts of soil compaction on soil health indicators (Byrnes et al., 2018) and on GHG emissions (Hernandez‐Ramirez et al., 2021). Meta‐analysisstudiesonsoilcompaction remediationoftenfocusingononesinglemeasure or activity (i.e., deep tillage (Peralta et al., 2021; Schneider et al., 2017), earthworm activity (Van Groenigen et al., 2014), no tillage (Pittelkow et al., 2015b), or crop residue return (Li et al., 2019b). Most studies focused on mechanized agriculture, with little or no attention for small‐holder agriculture. Apart from natural processes and factors causing compacted (sub)soils, soil compaction in small‐holder agriculture may be caused by practices of conservation agriculture, including no‐tillage and reduced tillage, and by flood irrigation. Conservation agriculture has been recommended by the FAO (2008) as a concept for resource‐efficient cropproduction, butitsbenefits are controversial (Giller etal., 2011).Subsoil compaction in conservation agriculture has been noticed in several studies (Abdalla et al., 2021; Brouder and Gomez‐Macpherson, 2014). Results presented in Chapter 4 of my thesis indicate also that practices related to conservation agriculture may lead to subsoil compaction and to a decline in wheat yields. It has been noted that the ongoing urbanization in small‐holder farming countries has stimulated the mechanization of small‐holder agriculture (Huo et al., 2020), and although the light‐weight two‐wheel tractors have low axle loads, traffic‐induced soil compaction have been found in both topsoil and in subsoil in small‐holder agriculture (Baudron et al., 2012). Results presented in Chapter 5 suggest that human induced compacted subsoils are at more shallow depth in small‐holder agriculture than in mechanized agriculture. Thus, (sub)soil compaction in small‐holder agriculture should not be neglected. I did not find substantive differences between mechanized and small‐holder agriculture in theeffectivenessofdifferentstrategiesforaddressingsubsoilcompaction.Thismaysuggest that the experiences from mechanized agriculture in general may be adopted also in small‐ holder agriculture, and vice versa. However, as indicated before, measures have to be adjusted to site‐specific conditions, i.e., depend on soil properties, climate and cropping systems, irrespective of mechanized or small‐holder agriculture. I used mixed‐effect models in the data analysis, which were superior compared to fixed‐ effect models and random‐effect models. When a single parameter value is assumed common to all studies, fixed‐effect models are usually selected; the variation in effect sizes then comes from the within‐study variance (Table 6.1). However, random‐effect models are115 usedcommonlywhen theparametersunderlying studieshavenormaldistributions(Higgins et al., 2009), and the models consider the possibility of correlation of within‐study results (Yu et al., 2015). In my study, mixed‐effect models were selected, where soil compaction managing measures were set as fixed effects and studies were set as random effects. In this case, the random study effect and random experiment effects nested within studies were all considered. The drawback of mixed‐effect models lies in that they estimate mean responses of dependent variables (yield, bulk density and penetration resistance) to independent variables (measures for soil compaction management), while the mean responses are only representative for average conditions of factors included in the regression model (Yu et al., 2016). The Akaike information criterion (AIC) may be used as a supplement to mixed‐effect model analyses (Qin et al., 2015). In Chapter 2, the AIC was not included because I assumed that the results from each study were independent (between years and locations). Table 6.1 Differences between fixed effect model and random effect model in meta‐ analysis (summarized from Gurevitch, 2018) Fixed‐effect model Random‐effect model Variation in effect sizes comes from Within‐study (sampling) variance Sampling variance & between study variance (heterogeneity) “true” effects Same in all studies Different between studies Scope of application Apply only to a given group of studies Apply more generally 6.4 Spatial variations in soil compaction and soil functioning Within‐field spatial variations were examined in four fields of four different farms through random soil sampling, laboratory analyses and semi‐variogram tools (Chapter 3). Spatial variation analysis is a common practice in mechanized agriculture, where farmers manage the field in a uniform way (Finger et al., 2019). Information about within‐field spatial variations may help in selecting optimum field management practices and amendments to increase soil productivity (Lipiec and Usowicz, 2018). Within‐field variation in soil properties is often considered a crucial source of the heterogeneity in crop yields (Diacono et al., 2013), which was also taken as a hypothesis in my study. I focused on the relationship between soil bulk density and soil functioning,116 including crop productivity and soil C and N transformations and emissions. However, correlations coefficients (R2 ) were less than 0.25 in the linear regression analysis between spatial variations in soil bulk density and soil texture on the one hand and spatial variations in crop yields on the other hand, in the 8 field * year combinations (except for field A in 2016), which suggests that the spatial variations in crop yield were not so much related to soil properties but to variations in field management and to random variations (Pittelkow et al., 2015a). However, the spatial variation in crop yield were relatively small. Within‐field variations in soil properties commonly increase with an increase in the size of the field (Ali et al., 2019). Most soil properties were spatially dependent; the range values werelargerthan200mfor8outofthe11soilvariablesexaminedinthefieldof21ha,which were indeed larger than the ranges in the smaller field of 5 ha (for 7 out of the 11 variables examined, the range was smaller than 40 m). The larger and more complex the within‐field spatial variation is, the more difficult the field management will be. Spatial variations in soil texture may affect crop yields especially in sandy soils, due to their effects on soil water holding capacity (Galka et al., 2016; Jankowski et al., 2011). Spatial variations in subsoil compaction are not easily detected and when interactions with soil texture occur, may greatly complicate the relationships between soil texture and crop yield. The 4 fields examined in the Hoeksche Waard in my study had a light clay and sandy clay soil texture (more than 91% of the samples had a clay content between 11% and 27%), and the soil texture was spatially strongly dependent, but there were no clear interactions between soil texture and soil bulk density. Large‐scale spatial variation in soil productivity may be caused also by spatial variations and differences in cropping systems. Comparisons between mechanized and small‐holder cropping systems have been discussed for long (Paudel et al., 2019; Van Loon et al., 2020). These studies often emphasize that small‐holder systems may benefit from mechanization and that mechanized agriculture may benefit from practices of small‐holder systems. Farmers in the Hoeksche Waard make use of GPS‐controlled trafficking and yield maps, which is non‐existing in small‐holder systems (Lobo et al., 2017). Many farmers in small‐ holder systems cannot even afford a mini‐tiller (Paudel et al., 2019). In recent years, unmanned aerial vehicles open up a new way of obtaining field information which is often more efficient than through field sampling and laboratory analyses. The use of these unmanned aerial vehicles possibly combined with simulation modeling and field tests, may also contribute to obtaining a better understanding of the spatial variations in soil bulk density in relation to soil functioning.117 6.5 Prototyping a high‐precision measure for compacted subsoil A prototype of a high‐precision bore‐hole method for remediating compacted subsoil was designed,andtested in fourfield experiments in twocountries. The potential advantagesof this measure are i) high precision and effective, and ii) less risk of re‐compaction. This measure was born out of the studies presented by (Laker and Nortjé, 2020; Raper and Bergtold, 2007). The bore‐hole method increased crop yields in the two field experiments conducted in Luancheng and in one experimental treatment out of two experiments in Odiliapeel. The greater effectiveness of the bore‐hole method in Luancheng is likely related to the shallow depth of the compacted soil layer (15‐30 cm). In contrast, the compacted subsoil was >35 cm in Odiliapeel. From soil penetration charts, it was clear that the penetration resistance rapidly increased from a depth of ~20 cm, and that peak values were found at about 25 cm. Thus, the 30 cm deep borehole were able to remediate the most compacted soil layers in Luancheng, through which root could grow more easily. In the review of (Laker and Nortjé, 2020), the depth of the trenches were 45 cm and 90cm, while the compacted soil layers were deeper than 20 cm. They mentioned that the effectiveness of 45 cm trenches was greater than those of 90 cm deep. The yield increases of the bore‐hole treatment were relatively large (~30%), suggesting indeed that crop yields were reduced by the compacted subsoil in the control treatments, and that the bore‐hole treatments were effective in remediating the compacted subsoils. However, the cause‐effect relationship is not clear, although the beneficial effects of the bore‐hole treatment is very likely related to increased root growth. Thereby, plants likely had access to more soil water and nutrients, which increased crop production. However, it cannot be excluded that other factors played a role too, including a better aeration of the (sub)soil, although only at a limited area. The yield effects of the bore‐hole treatments tended to be larger than the overall mean yield effect of deep ploughing and subsoiling as presented in literature (e.g., Schroder et al., 2017). Evidently, the beneficial effects of the bore‐holetreatmentsoncropyieldarelargeenoughtojustifyfurtherstudiesandtoexplore the potentials of the bore‐hole method fully. The Luancheng experimental station provides good conditions for further testing the bore‐ hole method, as the station has rich experiences with various cropping systems, tillage practices and long‐term field experimentation. Long term field experiments have been considered as “the only practical way of assessing the long‐term sustainability and productivity of husbandry systems within the agro‐ecological zone in which they exist” (Johnston and Poulton, 2018). Also, long‐term experiments commonly offer convincing results of trends and dynamics instead of static snapshots (Bationo et al., 2012). The118 Luancheng experimental station is part of Chinese ecosystem research network (CERN), the longest‐lived ecological network in China (Fu et al., 2010). The Luancheng experimental station offers also the possibility to explore the potentials of bore‐hole method under the conditionsofclimate change,giventheir richexperiencewithclimate change research(Li et al., 2019a; Wang et al., 2018). Likely, the effects of the bore‐hole method are enhanced under conditions of increased rainfall variability. 6.6 A toolbox of strategies in soil compaction management The DPSIR framework provides a transparent approach for presenting and analyzing the cause–effect‐response relationships in soil compaction (Fig 6.1). Establishing a DPSIR frameworkforaparticularsettingisanimportantbutcomplextask,asmorethanonecause‐ effect relationship may have to be considered and described, noting that impacts in soil ecosystems can rarely be attributed to a single cause (Tscherning et al., 2012). In the soil compaction cause–effect chain, the driving force seems to come from the drive in agriculture to increase crop productivity and to lower production costs (e.g., Schjonning et al., 2015). However, a low awareness of the risk of soil compaction, variable weather condition and poor timing of field activities, and lack of appropriate machinery and agricultural advisory services may also play a role. The driving forces induce pressures (literarily) on the soil, which leads to soil densification and to a change in the state of the soil, which then may lead to negative impacts on soil functioning. The DPSIR framework is also instrumental for explaining the focus of the soil compaction prevention, amelioration and alleviation strategies (Fig. 6.1). Fig. 6.1 The DPSIR concept with focus on cause‐effect soil compaction relationships (source: Chapter 2).119 Many farmers in the Netherlands are concerned about soil compaction and about the possible impacts of compacted subsoils on crop yields, but it does not mean that farmers can easily adjust practices and take preventive measures. Farmers in the Hoeksche Waard areforerunnersandeagertolearnnewinsightsandtools.Theyinvitedustoexaminespatial variations in soil bulk density, soil properties and soil nutrients. They were interested in the results of our investigations presented in Chapter 3, but wished to have clearer recommendations about the next steps and practical implications. Currently, many farmers in The Netherlands pay attention to spatial variations in crop yield and soil properties (Heijting etal.,2011);theypracticeprecisionagriculture, based onyieldmaps and based on visual observations, and they seek cooperation with scientists. Their high education level is very instrumental in this respect (De Weerd and Klandermans, 1999). The impacts of compacted sub(soils) can be large. Compacted subsoils may decrease grain yield of cereals and soybean by 6 to 34% (Obour and Ugarte, 2021). Moreover, compacted soil increase the fuel use for soil tillage and often increase fertilizer and water inputs, to offset yield losses from compacted subsoils (Chamen et al., 2015). Emissions of N2O are nearly doubled in compacted soils (Hernandez‐Ramirez et al., 2021). Clearly, these impacts demand for prevention, amelioration, and alleviation measures (Fig 6.1). The idea of preventionandprecautionistoexemptthedrivingforcesofhumaninducedsoilcompaction, thereby decreasing the pressures on the soil (Fig 6.1). Amelioration measures aim at remediatingcompacted(sub)soils,i.e.,thesemeasuresaimatimprovingthestateofthesoil (e.g., soil bulk density, porosity). Alleviation measures aim to lower the negative impacts of compacted subsoils (e.g., nutrient and moisture deficiencies, water logging), through nutrientand moisture supplementation and/orextradrainage. During the last twodecades, soil compaction prevention measures have been studied especially in mechanized agriculture, and amelioration and alleviation measures in small‐holder agriculture. It is as yet unclear whether this difference in focus just reflects a time difference or a difference in effectiveness and practice. Evidently, this needs further study. The suggested toolbox of various measures and strategies, as function of site‐specific conditions, requires comprehension of the DPSIR framework in practice and greater monitoring efforts of the current state and impacts of soil compaction (Fig 6.2). Soil analytical laboratories should offer routine soil tests to farmers; these soil test should be abletoprovideaquickandrobustassessmentof(thespatialvariationsin)the‘densification state’ of (sub)soils.120 Fig. 6.2 A toolbox of soil management strategies for mechanized and small‐holder agricultural systems 6.7 Conclusions This PhD thesis provides an analysis of the possible impacts of spatial variations in soil bulk density in farmers’ fields, and of the efficacy of measures aimed at the prevention, alleviation and remediation of soil compaction. During the last 20 years, the research focus has been on how to prevent soil compaction in countries with mechanized agriculture, while the focus has been on amelioration and alleviation measures in countries with small‐holder agriculture. Results presented in the literature during the last two decades indicated that there are no fundamental differences between mechanized and small‐holder agricultural systems in the mean effect sizes of the measures.Controlledtraffichadapositiveeffectoncropyieldincountrieswithmechanized121 agriculture (+38%) and in small‐holder agriculture (+16%), and led to a lower soil bulk density in topsoil and subsoil (−4% to −6%). No‐till had negative effects on crop yield and increased soil bulk density. Deep tillage, including subsoiling, had positive effects on crop yields (+9% to +10%), while soil bulk density was decreased by about 3%. Prevention measures have to be prioritized, but amelioration and alleviation are often equally needed and also equally effective, depending on site‐specific conditions. The random sampling approach and semi‐variograms were effective in characterizing field spatialvariationsinfarmers’fieldsintheHoekscheWaard,theNetherlands.Semi‐variogram analyses showed that crop yields and soil properties were spatially dependent. There were no clear relationship between within‐field variations in soil bulk density and within‐field variationsinwheatyields.TheratioofCO2 toN2Oemissionshadanegativerelationshipwith soil bulk density, especially following N fertilization. There was no specific threshold for subsoil bulk density beyond which emissions changed dramatically. Potential N2O emission is a more sensitive indicator for the effect ofsoil bulk density on soil functioning than wheat yield. The long‐term field experiment in Luancheng (China) revealed that no tillage and reduced tillage decreased winter wheat yields and were less effective in soil carbon sequestration compared to conventional moldboard ploughing with crop residue return. The average winter wheat yields were 18% lower under no‐till and 6% lower under reduced tillage than underconventionalmoldboardplowingafter17years(from2001to2018).Theloweryields in the no‐till and reduced tillage treatments are likely related to the changes in soil bulk density with depth, but further studies are needed to unravel the cause‐effect relationships more in‐depth. Tillage treatments did not significantly affect maize yields in the winter wheat – summer maize double cropping system. A prototype precision bore‐hole method was developed and tested to enhance root and crop growth in compacted soils. The method was effective in enhancing maize yield by up to 30%. The method appeared to be more effective in fields with compacted subsoils at shallowdepth(i.e.,15‐30cm)thaninfieldswiththecompactedsubsoilsatdepthof>30cm. Rootsgrewpreferentiallyinthebore‐holes, butnostatistically significantdifferencesin root weight were found between treatments for depths of 0‐20, 20‐40 and 40‐60 cm. Sorghum did not respond to the bore‐hole treatments. Further tests and developments are needed. A toolbox of soil compaction prevention, amelioration and alleviation measures was proposed, to emphasize that different approaches are needed for the different conditions in practice.122 6.8 Recommendations for further research The actual densification state of (sub)soils in practice is not well known, because there is no routine monitoring of for example soil bulk density and porosity on farmers’ fields. Such monitoring is needed to be able to diagnose which strategies are most effective to address soil compaction. As soil sampling and analyses for assessing the densification state of the subsoilarerelativelyexpensive,thereisaneedfornewindirecttechnologies, thatmakeuse of unmanned aerial vehicles and sensors. Cooperation between farmers, scientists, and technique companies can be considered a win‐win approach. Farmers may identify potential problems of their fields rather easily, but often do not understand the cause‐effect relationships. Scientists take the research task, while technique companies develop the required sensors and technology. This type of cooperationismorecommoninTheNetherlandsthanin China;evidentlythereisaneedfor greater cooperation of scientists with farmers and companies in China, building also on the experiences of the Science and Technology Backyards (e.g., Zhang et al., 2020) Long‐termfieldsexperimentwithtillagetreatmentsremainnecessary,alsobecauseimpacts of tillage become apparent partly in the long term, as shown by the results of the experimentinLuancheng(Chapter4).Thisholdsaswellfortheprototypebore‐holemethod. More tests of the bore‐hole method are needed, testing more different conditions, e.g., depth and diameter of bore‐holes, irrigation treatments, crop residue mixed with bore‐hole soils. It would be interesting also to test continuous grooves (narrow trenches) of 20 to 30 cm deep in Luancheng, instead of boreholes. Evidently, the concept of the prototype bore‐ hole method needs to be developed further. With the further mechanization of crop production, the enlargement of farms and the development of contractors who do all the field work in China, there is also need for pre‐ cautionary measures,includingraisingawarenessoftheriskofsoilcompaction inChinaand other rapidly developing countries. Close attentions should be paid on the changes of soil bulk density and crop yields. Prevention measures are not easily taken by farmers because there is commonly no quick‐response. Instead, the effect of deep ploughing or subsoiling, application of fertilizer and irrigation, create direct and ‘visible’ effects. This emphasizes the need of awareness raising.123

Chapter 1 General introduction. The general research questions were proposed by my promotor. I delineated the research questions, described how it fits in the current scientific literature and described its potential social impact. I revised the text two times, after comments of my promotor. Chapter 2 Soil compaction prevention, amelioration and alleviation measures are effective in mechanized and smallholder agriculture: a meta‐analysis. The research described in this chapter was part of the EU funded project SoilCare (“Soil care for profitable and sustainable crop production in Europe”). The initial research questions were based on the objective of the project SoilCare, but were amended during the course of the study. I proposed the methodology with the help of my promoter. I did the literature review, data analysis, and wrote the draft manuscript. I revised the text five times, following comments of my promotor and other co‐authors. Chapter 3 Within‐field spatial variations in subsoil bulk density related to crop yield and potential CO2 and N2O emissions. This chapter was based on a cooperation between farmers, WUR staff, and Eurofins Agro company. I contributed to defining the research question, proposed the methodology and the experimental design with the help of my promoter. I did the field sampling and laboratory measurements with the help of technicians. I did the data analysis and wrote the draft manuscript. I revised the five times, following comments of my promotor and co‐authors. Chapter 4 Responses of cereal yields and soil carbon sequestration to four long‐term tillage practices in the North China Plain. This chapter is part of a long‐term field experiment, in which I was involved at the start during the periode 2008‐2011, when I was a MSc student, and again during the period 2019 to 2021 as PhD student. I analyzed the data and wrote156 the first draft together with the first authors. We revised the text four times, following comments of my promotor, co‐promoter and co‐authors. Chapter 5 A bore‐hole method for remediating compacted subsoils increased maize yield ‐ prototype field tests. I proposed the research question and methodology with the help of my promoter. I did the field work and laboratory measurements with the help of technicians. I did the data analysis and wrote the draft manuscript. I revised the text five times, following comments of my promotor and co‐authors. Chapter 6 General discussion. I wrote the first draft of the text after a discussion with my promotors on the subjects and arguments to be included. I revised the text once, after comments of my promotor and co‐promotor. 2022 Signature PhD candidate: Peipei Yang Signature promotor for agreement Oene Oenema157 PE&RC Training and Education Statement With the training and education activities listed below the PhD candidate has complied with the requirements set by the C.T. de Wit Graduate School for Production Ecology and Resource Conservation (PE&RC) which comprises of a minimum total of 32 ECTS (= 22 weeks of activities) Review of literature (6 ECTS) - Review of long-term soil management practices and crop yield Writing of project proposal (4.5 ECTS) - Exploring relationships between soil compaction and soil functioning Post-graduate courses (4.3 ECTS) - Geostatistics; PE&RC (2015) - Introduction to R for statistical analysis; PE&RC (2015) - mixed linear models; PE&RC (2015) - Meta-analysis; PE&RC (2016) - R&big data; PE&RC (2017) Competence strengthening / skills courses (2.7 ECTS) - The essentials of scientific writing and presenting; WGS (2015) - Project and time management; WGS (2016) PE&RC Annual meetings, seminars and the PE&RC weekend (1.8 ECTS) - PE&RC First year’s weekend (2015) - PE&RC Last year’s weekend (2018) Discussion groups / local seminars or scientific meetings (6 ECTS) - R User meetings (2015-2019) International symposia, workshops and conferences (5 ECTS) - Wageningen soil conference (2015, 2017) BSc/MSc thesis supervision (3 ECTS) - Experiment on shrink and swell ability of bentonite on small scale