Indian Journal of Agronomy 46 (2) :227-232 (June 2001) Effect of depthof irrigationandlevel and time of nitrogen applicationongrowth,yield andnutrientuptakeby wheat (Triticumaestivum) B.K. SAREN' AND P.K. JANA P Department of Agronomy, Bidhan ChahdraKrishi Viswa Vidyalaya,~ o h d i ~ u r , Nadia, % - WestBengal741 252 Received :December 1998 ABSTRACT A field experimentwas conductedonsandy-loamsoil duringthe winter season of 1992-93 and 1993-94 at Kalyani, West Bengal, to study the effect of different

and 12cm water), levelsof nitrogen(50and 100kglha) and itstime of application (before irrigation and after irrigation) on plant height, yield attributes, yield and uptake of N, P and K by wheat (Triticum aestivum L. emend. Fiori & Paol.). r Irri'gation level up to 1 FC resulted in significantly higher plant height, yield attributes, as well as grain and straw yields of wheat over the other levels of irrigation. Nitrogen O 100 kglha when half of N top-dressed after irrigation recorded greater grain and straw yields and yield components. The highest uptakeof N, P and K in grainand straw and total uptakeof N, P and Kwere also recordedwith 1 FC irrigation.Similarly, 100kg Nlhaand itstop-dressingjust after irrigation resulted in maximum N, P and K uptake in straw as well as grain of wheat crop, Total uptakeof N, Pand K bywheat crop showedthe similartrend as in case of grain and straw with nitrogenapplication. Keywords : Wheat, Irrigation, Nitrogen level and time, yield attributes, - Yield, Nutrientconcentrationand uptake Productivityof wheat crop is improved movement of nitrogen fertilizerbeyond the due to judicious application of irrigation crop root zone. Time of nitrogen top and nitrogenous fertilizer.Under and over- dressingalso has a significantrolein higher irrigation caused lower fertilizer-use productivity of the crop. Nitrogen efficiency of crop. Over-irrigationnotonly application before irrigation of higher enhances deep percolation of costly quantity reduces the availability of N, -, irrigation water but also accelerates the resulting low yield of crop which is the Presentaddress :'Department of Agronomy, Institute of Agriculture,Palli SikshaBhavana, Visva Bharati, Sriniketan, West Bengal228 SAREN AND JANA [Vol.46,No.2 usual practice. Sinceinformationon these N, P and K of grain and straw were analy aspects is lacking for alluvial region of sed separately after harvesting the crop on West Bengal, the present experiments was dry-weight basis. The uptake of nutrients conducted to assess the optimum depth of was calculated by multiplying the concen irrigationand nitrogen applicationforyield tration ofnutrients with therespectiveyield of wheat and fertilizer-useefficiencyof the of wheat in kglha. crop. Uptake(kglha)=Concentration(%)x dry weight,i.e. yield(kgha) .' MATERIALS AND METHODS' The crop received 49.0 and 54.0 mm A field experiment was conducted rainfall during 1992-93 and 1993-94 during the winter season of 1992-93 and respectively during the growing period. 1993-94 at District Seed Farm, BCKV, Kalyani,West Bengal,on sandy-loamsoil, RESULTSAND DISCUSSION having 222.94, 23.63 and 189.20kgha of Plant height and yield attributes available N, P and K, respectively, with Irrigation levels increased plant height organic carbon content0.53% and pH 6.7. significantly.Application of 1F c quantity The treatments consisted of 4 levels of of irrigation water produced maximum irrigation [up to %, 1,3 1 2and 2 FC (field plant height and it was the lowest under 3/4 capacity),i.e. 4.5,6,9and 12cm irrigation FC level. water],2 levelsof N, viz. 50and 100kg/ha, Application of 100kg Nlha and when it where half of N was applied basal and rest was appliedjust after irrigation produced half N at crown-root initiation (CRI) stage higher plant height over 50 kg Nlha and at 2 different times, viz. before irrigation top-dressed before irrigation (Table 1). andjust after irrigation. These treatments Balyan (1992)also reported similar incre were tested in split-plot design with 3 ase in plant height with an increase level of replications,allotting irrigationlevelsin the N. main plots, N levelsin subplotand time of Yield attributes,viz. effectivetillers/m2, nitrogen applicationin subplots.Wheat 'UP grains panicle and 1,000-grain weight, 262' was sown 23 cm apart in rows on 2 influenced markedly by irrigation treat December and 18November with a seed ment. The highest number of effective rate of 100 kglha and hatvested on 19 tillers, grainslpanicle and 1,000-grain March and 10March during 1992-93 and weight were observed under 1FC irrigation 1993-94 respectively. Half dose of N and depth.The results clearly indicate that the full dose of 50 kg P2?, and 50 kg K20/ha application of irrigation water to an were applied basal in the form of urea, optimum level (1 FC) was beneficial for single superphos>phateand rnuriate of improvementof all the yield components, potash respectively.Each level of irrigation whereas insufficient irrigation water and was applied at CRI, maximum tillering, over-irrigation were not conducive for floweringand dough stagesof cropwith the proper crop growth and development. help of 900V notch. Concentrations (%) of Nitrogen resulted significantincreasein\ 4 Table 1 .Effect of irrigation,nitrogen and its timeof applicationonheight and productivityof wheat c J --\ 0 Treatment Height of ~fGctive--- Grains/ 1,000-grain Grainyield Strawyield -. plant (cm) tillers/m2 parlicle weight(g) (qha) (@a) - E5 \\

all the yield attributes (Table 1).Maximum wheat.The 1FCirrigationimproved all the tillers/m2,grainslpanicle and 1,000-grain yield components and growth of wheat weight were observed under 100kg Nlha. which contributed to significantly greater Nitrogen 50 kglha did not meet the grain andstraw yields. Similarobservation requirement of nitrogen for wheat and was made by Reddy and Dakshnamurti consequently wheat plants experienced N (1976). deficiency which resulted poor yield Nitrogen levels and its time of attributes. Similar resultswere repaded by application influenced grain and straw Kumar et al. (1994) and Singh and Singh yields markedly. Nitrogen 100 kglha and --- (1995). half of nitrsgen when top-dressedjust after Time of nitrogen application also irrigation recorded greater grain and straw influenced markedly by irrigation treat- yields. A lowerlevelof nitrogen (50kgtha) ment. The highest number of effective was insufficient for optimum growth and tillers, grainslpanicle and 1,000-grain dvelopment of wheat crop caused weight were observed under 1FCirrigation decreased yield of wheat., Nitrogen top depth. The results clearly indicate that the dressed beforeirrigationenhancesleaching application of irrigation water to an loss of nitrogen with irrigation water optimum level (1 FC) was beneficial for beyond the crop root-zonedepth resulted improvement of all the yield components, reduced crop yield. Availability of N whereas insufficient irrigation water and increased when it was applied just after over-'irrigation were not conducive for irrigation and also improved plant growth proper crop growth and development. and development and hence higher grain Time of nitrogen application also and straw yields were recorded under this influenced the yield attributes greatly. treatment. The results are in accordance Nitrogen top-dressed after irrigation (at with Singh and Singh (1995). CRI stage) showed better result than top dressed before irrigation. This might be Nutrient uptake owing grateravailability of nitrogen in this Irrigation significantly influenced N, P method of nitrogen application. This and K uptake in grain in both the years, observation supportsthe finding of Rajput whereas in straw during 1993-94 only and Verma (1994). (Table2).Thehighestuptakeof N, P andK -__ - in grain and straw recorded with irrigation Yield up to 1FCand thelowestobservedunder% Both grain and straw yields of wheat FC irrigation. Reduction in N, P and K were significantlyinfluenced by irrigation uptake with over-and under-irrigationwere levels except straw yield obtained during due to decreased yields of grain and straw. 1993-94 (Table I). Maximum yields of Yadav (1991) also made similar obser grain and straw were produced with vation. irrigation levels up to 1FC. Both under Total N, P and N uptake of wheat was - irrigation,i.e. %FC and over-irrigation,i.e. alsogreatestwith 1FC irrigationlevel.The 3 1 2and 2FCresulted in reduction of yield of highest total N, P and K uptake at 1FC wasTable2. Effectof inigation, nitrogenandits timeof applicationonN, PandK uptake(kg/ha) by wheat Treatment Uptake ofN (kg/ha) Uptake of P(kg/ha) Uptakeof K (kg/ha) Straw Grain Total Straw Grain Total Straw Grain Total

. . ... . . . Levels of nitrogen( k g h )

. . ... ) . - . * . - "' . ' . . . . . .. .. . . . .232 SARENAND JANA [Vol.46,No.2 attributed owing to an improvement in yield and N, P and K uptke of straw and grain. Uptake of N, P and K were significantly affected by nitrogen levels except P uptake in straw during 1993-94. However, 100kg N/ha enhanced N, P and K uptake compared with 50 kg Nha possilily with increased yields of grain and straw. Total N, P and K uptake of wheat followed the same trend as N, P .and K uptake in grain and straw due to nitrogen levels. Maximum total uptake of N, P and K were observed with 100kg Nha due to itssignificanteffect of N, P and K uptakeof grain and straw. Similar observation was made by Parihar and Tripathi (1990). Time of nitrogen application did not have significant effect on nutrients uptake of wheat except N uptake in grain and P uptake in straw and grain during 1993-94 (Table 2). However, nitrogen top-dressed just after irrigation recorded higher N, P and K uptake with nitrogen applied after irrigation, was mainly due to increased yield of grain and straw of wheat. The result is in confirmity with the finding of -Parihar and Tripathi (1990). Effect of nitrogen application time on total uptake of N, P and K by wheat was significant, except total uptake of Kin both the years. Nitrogen top-dressed after irrigation iesulted in the highest total uptake of N, P and Kby wheatcrop. Lower uptake of N, P and K in grain and straw 'with nitrogen applied before irrigation resulted the lowest total N, P and K uptake by wheat crop in this treatment. Similar results were also made by Yadav (1991) and Dubey and Sharma (1996). It could be concluded that application of 1FC irrigation and 100kg Nha, of which 50%top-dressed just after irrigation, showed beneficial effect in optimizing the growth,yield and nitrogen-useefficiencyof wheat crop in alluvial sandy-loam soils of West Bengal. Balyan, J.S. 1992.Effect of organic recycling on yield attributes, nitrogen concentration and uptake in wheat (Triticumaestivum).Indian Journal ofAgronomy37(4):701-704. Dubey, Y.P. and Sharma,S.K. Effect of imgation and fertilizers on growth, yield and nutrient uptake of wheat (Triticumaestivum).Indian Journal ofAgronomy41(1):48-51. Kumar, A., Sharma,D.K. and Sharma, H.C. 1994. Growth, yield and water use efficiency ,of wheat(Triticumaestivum)as influencedby ir rigation and nitrogen in sodic soils. Indian Journal ofAgronomy 39 (2):220-224. Parihar, S.S. andTripathi, R.S. 1990.Yield, water use and nutrients uptake of wheat as influ enced by sowing time,imgation and nitrogen levels.MadrasAgriculturalJournal 77(7-8) : 309-3 16. Rajput, R.L. and Verma, O.P. 1994.Effectof split and modifiedsource of ureaon theyield of ir rigated wheat (Triticum aestivum).Indian Journal ofAgronomy 39 (3):403-405. Reddy, D.S. andDakshinamurti,C. 1976.Effectof applyingdifferentquantitiesof irrigationwater on the movement of available nitrogen in a sandy loam soil of Delhi. Journal of Indian SociefyofSoil sciehce24(2):163-167.

rainfed wheat(Triticumaestivum)to leveland methodofnitrogenapplication. IndianJournal ofAgronomy40 (3):507-509. Yadav,G.L. 1991.Effectof imgation regimes,ni trogen and zinc fertilization on the uptake of major nutrients (NPK) in late sown wheat on vertisols or Chambal Command. Annals oj Agricultural Research 12(4):399-402.