Nebraska ranks 17th in wheat production and is one of only five states in the U.S. where hard white wheat is grown. Wheat acreage is primarily located in the southern part of the Panhandle, southeast Nebraska and along the Nebraska-Kansas border. In 2023, Nebraska's wheat production resulted in $255 million from 880,000 acres harvested, according to USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service.

View UNL Variety Testing Program data on wheat via the link below.

(308) 632-1266 ccreech2@unl.edu Faculty Bio

(308) 632-1244 dsantra2@unl.edu Faculty Bio

Like any crop, winter wheat should be grown as part of entire crop production system. Decisions made throughout the production system will impact the success of the winter wheat crop. Ecofarming is a popular production system for many winter wheat growers in Nebraska.

Understanding plant development can be helpful for making management decisions. The optimum timing of fertilizer, irrigation, herbicide, insecticide, and fungicide applications are best determined by crop growth stage rather than calendar date.

The impact of various crop stresses such as frost, heat, drought, disease, insect damage, or weed competition can be more accurately predicted with a clear understanding of the relationships between crop growth stage and plant response to stress.

A productive wheat crop starts with a firm, moist seedbed planted at the optimum time and at an adequate seeding rate.

Although grazing winter wheat is not as common in Nebraska as in the southern Great Plains, grazing can be used to lower risk from environmental stresses such as drought and hail, and economic risks associated with grain markets.

Growers can harvest wheat for grain only or they can harvest both the grain and forage. They can also harvest just the forage through “graze-out” of the crop.

*NOTE: To read or print PDF documents, you must have Adobe Reader installed on your computer. Download Adobe Reader Free

View all wheat hybrid test results on the UNL Crop Variety and Hybrid Testing Program page