Mechanization and Postharvest Cluster, Sustainable Impact Platform, International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines

Mechanization and Postharvest Cluster, Sustainable Impact Platform, International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines

Soil, climate, and water Cluster, Sustainable Impact Platform, International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines

Selkie Consulting Ltd., Westport, Ireland

Tax calculation will be finalised at checkout

“The book will be helpful to the engineers and researchers working in the discipline of rice-straw management. In addition, the book may draw a wider readership from the graduate and undergraduate students, faculty members, field managers having interest in environmental sciences, agronomy and soil sciences. … the book can be a great contribution to the applied science research and the value-chain based business models can be proved to be an eye opener for the sustainable rice-straw management for different countries.” (Vipin Kumar Singh, Pardeep Singh and Rishikesh Singh, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 272, 2020)

Martin Gummert (Dipl.-Ing. agr.) is Senior Scientist at the International Rice Research Institute and leading the Mechanization and Postharvest Cluster of the Sustainable Impact Platform. He has 28 years of experience on mechanisation, postharvest, value chain upgrading, capacity building, small and medium industry promotion, business model development and facilitation of multi stakeholder platforms working in Asia, Africa and Europe. He has previously worked for GTZ, University of Hohenheim, Germany, PEM consulting and for two years as freelance consultant. He has been instrumental in developing and dissemination improved postharvest technologies throughout Southeast Asia. He has published and co-published 30 articles in peer reviewed journals and 16 book chapters.

Dr. Nguyen Van Hung is a scientist of the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI, since 2013) and associate professor of Nong Lam University (since 2012). Hung has 23 years of experience on agricultural mechanization and postharvest. He is in leading the rice straw projects and researches at IRRI. He has published and co-published about 20 articles in peer reviewed journals, and 5 book chapters.

Dr. Pauline Chivenge is a Senior Scientist in Soils and Nutrient Management at the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) in the Philippines. Her research focuses on sustainable management of soil and nutrients in current and emerging irrigated and rainfed rice-based cropping systems. She has worked in diverse farming systems on topics that include biogeochemical nutrient cycling, natural resource management, watershed management, carbon sequestration, greenhouse gas emissions and sustainable ecosystem functioning. She has led a couple of international projects and has published more than 30 peer reviewed journal papers and has supervised about 15 MSc and PhD students.

Boru Douthwaite (PhD) is an evaluator, technology policy analyst and agricultural engineer with 25 years’ experience working on agricultural innovation in Africa, Asia and Latin America. He is the Principal of Selkie Consulting Limited. Previously he worked in the CGIAR as an Innovation and Impact Director and as Principal Scientist leading a research theme on knowledge sharing and learning. He has designed agricultural machinery that have sold in their thousands in Africa and Asia. He published a book and 35 articles in refereed journals.

Accessibility information for this book is coming soon. We're working to make it available as quickly as possible. Thank you for your patience.

Book Title : Sustainable Rice Straw Management

Editors : Martin Gummert, Nguyen Van Hung, Pauline Chivenge, Boru Douthwaite

DOI : https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-32373-8

eBook Packages : Earth and Environmental Science , Earth and Environmental Science (R0)

Copyright Information : The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2020

Hardcover ISBN : 978-3-030-32372-1 Published: 13 December 2019

Softcover ISBN : 978-3-030-32375-2 Published: 18 September 2020

eBook ISBN : 978-3-030-32373-8 Published: 27 November 2019

Number of Illustrations : 8 b/w illustrations, 52 illustrations in colour

Topics : Sustainable Development , Environmental Management , Climate Change/Climate Change Impacts , Agriculture , Environmental Engineering/Biotechnology